You know, folks, my dad used to have an expression. He'd say, A father knows he's a success when he turns and looks at his son or daughter and know that they turned out better than he did. I'm a success; I'm a hell of a success.

Beau, I love you. I'm so proud of you. I'm so proud of the son you've become; I'm so proud of the father you are.

And I'm also so proud of my son Hunter and my daughter, Ashley.

And my wife, Jill, the only one who leaves me both breathless and speechless at the same time.

It's an honor to share the stage tonight with President Clinton, a man who I think brought this country so far along that I only pray we do it again.

And last night, it was moving to watch Hillary, one of our great leaders, a great leader of this party, a woman who has made history and will continue to make history, a colleague, my friend, Sen. Hillary Clinton.

And I am truly honored to live in a country with the bravest warriors in the world.

And I'm honored to represent the first state, my state, the state of Delaware.

Since I've never been called a man of few words, let me say this
simply as I can: Yes. Yes, I accept your nomination to run and serve
with Barack Obama, the next president of the United States of America.

Let me make this pledge to you right here and now. For every American who is trying to do the right thing, for all those people in government who are honoring the pledge to uphold the law and honor the Constitution, no longer will you hear the eight most-dreaded words in the English language, The vice president's office is on the phone.

Barack and I took very different journeys to this destination, but we share a common story. Mine began in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and then Wilmington, Delaware.

My dad, who fell on hard times, always told me, though, Champ, when you get knocked down, get up. Get up. I was taught that by my dad. And, God, I wish my dad was here tonight.

But I thank God and I'm grateful that my mom, Catherine Eugenia Finnegan Biden, is here tonight.

Mom, I love you.

You know, my mom taught her children all the children who flocked to our house that you're defined by your sense of honor and you're redeemed by your loyalty. She believes that bravery lives in every heart, and her expectation is that it will be summoned. Failure at some point in your life is inevitable, but giving up is unforgivable.

As a child, I stuttered, and she lovingly would look at me and tell me, Joey, it's because you're so bright you can't get the thoughts out quickly enough.

When I was not as well-dressed as the other kids, she'd look at me and say, Joey, oh, you're so handsome, honey, you're so handsome.

And when I got knocked down by guys bigger than me and this is the God's truth she sent me back out and said, Bloody their nose so you can walk down the street the next day. And that's what I did.

You know and after the accident, she told me, she said, Joey, God sends no cross that you cannot bear. And when I triumphed, my mother was quick to remind me it was because of others.

My mother's creed is the American creed: No one is better than you. Everyone is your equal, and everyone is equal to you.

My parents taught us to live our faith and to treasure our families. We learned the dignity of work, and we were told that anyone can make it if they just try hard enough. That was America's promise.

And for those of us who grew up in middle-class neighborhoods like Scranton and Wilmington, that was the American dream.

Ladies and gentlemen, but today, today that American dream feels like it's slowly slipping away. I don't have to tell you that. You feel it every single day in your own lives. I've never seen a time when Washington has watched so many people get knocked down without doing anything to help them get back up.

Almost every single night, I take the train home to Wilmington, Delaware, sometimes very late. As I sit there in my seat and I look out that window, I see those flickering lights of the homes that pass by, I can almost hear the conversation they're having at their kitchen tables after they put their kids to bed.

Like millions of Americans, they're asking questions as ordinary as they are profound, questions they never, ever thought they'd have to ask themselves.

Should Mom move in with us now that Dad's gone? Fifty, sixty, seventy dollars just to fill up the gas tank? How in God's name, with winter coming, how are we going to heat the home? Another year, no raise. Did you hear they may be cutting our health care at the company? Now we owe more money on our home than our home is worth. How in God's name are we going to send the kids to college? How are we going to retire, Joe?

You know, folks, that's the America that George Bush has left us. And that's the America we'll continue to get if George excuse me, if John McCain is elected president of the United States of America. Freudian slip. Freudian slip.

And, folks, these are not isolated discussions among families down on their luck. These are common stories among middle-class people who worked hard their whole life, played by the rules, on the promise that their tomorrows would be better than their yesterdays.

That promise is the promise of America. It defines who we are as a people. And now it's in jeopardy. I know it. You know it.

But John McCain doesn't seem to get it. Barack Obama gets it, though. Like many of us in this room, like many of us in this hall, Barack Obama has worked his way up. He is the great American story, you know?

I believe the measure of a man is not the road he travels but the choices he makes along that road.

And, ladies and gentlemen, Barack Obama could have done anything after he graduated from college. With all his talent and promise, he could have written his own ticket to Wall Street. But what did he choose to do?

He chose to go to Chicago, the South Side of Chicago. There, there, in the South Side, he met women and men who had lost their jobs. Their neighborhood was devastated when the local steel plant closed. Their dreams had to be deferred; their self-esteem was gone. And, ladies and gentlemen, he made their lives the work of his life.

That's what you do when you're raised by a single mom who worked, went to school and raised two kids on her own. That's how you come to believe to the very core of your being that work is more than a paycheck. It's dignity. It's respect.

It's about whether or not you can look your child in the eye and say, We're going to be all right.

Because Barack Obama made that choice, 150 more children and parents have health care in Illinois. He fought to make that happen.

And because Barack Obama made that choice, working families in Illinois pay less taxes and more people have moved from welfare to the dignity of work. And he got it done.

And when he came to Washington, when he came to Washington, John and I watched with amazement how he hit the ground running, leading the fight to pass the most sweeping ethics reform in a generation.

He reached across party lines to pass a law that helped keep nuclear weapons out of the hands of terrorists.

And then he moved Congress and the president to give our wonderful wounded warriors the care and dignity they deserve.

You know, you can learn a lot about a man campaigning with him, debating him, seeing how he reacts under pressure. You learn about the strength of his mind. But even more importantly, you learn about the quality of his heart.

I watched how Barack touched people, how he inspired them. And I realized he had tapped into the oldest belief in America: We don't have to accept the situation we cannot bear; we have the power to change it.

And change it and changing it is exactly what Barack Obama will do. That's what he'll do for this country.

You know, John McCain is my friend. And I know you hear that phrase used all the time in politics. I mean it. John McCain is my friend.

We've traveled the world together. It's a friendship that goes beyond politics. And the personal courage and heroism demonstrated by John still amazes me.

But I profoundly disagree with the direction John wants to take this country, from Afghanistan to Iraq, from Amtrak to veterans.

You know, John thinks that, during the Bush years, quote, We've made great economic progress. I think it's been abysmal. And in the Senate, John has voted with President Bush 95 percent. And that is very hard to believe.

And when John McCain proposes $200 million in new taxes for corporate America, $1 billion alone for the largest companies in the nation but no, none, no relief for 100 million American families, that's not change. That's more of the same.

Even today, as oil companies post the biggest profits in history, nearly $500 billion in the last five years, John wants to give them another $4 billion in tax breaks. That's not change. That's the same.

And during the same time, John voted again and again against renewable energy, solar, wind, biofuels. That's not change. That's more of the same.

Millions of Americans have seen their jobs go offshore, yet John continues to support tax breaks for corporations that send them there. That's not change. That's more of the same.

He voted 19 times against the minimum wage for people who are struggling just to make it to the next day. That's not change. That's more of the same.

And when he says he'll continue to spend $10 billion a month, when the Iraqis have a surplus of nearly $80 billion, that's not change. That's more of the same.

The choice in the election is clear. These times require more than a good soldier. They require a wise leader. A leader who can change the change that everybody knows we need.

Barack Obama's going to deliver that change, because, I want to tell you, Barack Obama will reform our tax code. He will cut taxes for 95 percent of the American people who draw a paycheck. That's the change we need.

Barack Obama will transform the economy by making alternative energy a national priority and in the process creating 5 million new jobs and finally, finally freeing us from the grip of foreign oil. That's the change we need.

Barack Obama knows that any country that out-teaches us today will out-compete us tomorrow. That's why he'll invest in the next generation of teachers and why he'll make college more affordable. That's the change we need.

Barack Obama will bring down health care costs by $2,500 for the average family and, at long last, deliver affordable, accessible health care for every American.

That's the change we need.

Barack will put more cops on the street, put security back in Social Security, and he'll never, ever, ever give up until we achieve equal pay for women.

That's the change we need.

And as we gather here tonight, our country is less secure and more isolated than it has been at any time in recent history. The Bush foreign policy has dug us into a very deep hole, with very few friends to help us climb out.

And for the last seven years, the administration has failed to face the biggest forces shaping this century: the emergence of Russia, China and India as great powers; the spread of lethal weapons; the shortage of secure supplies of energy, food and water; the challenge of climate change; and the resurgence of fundamentalism in Afghanistan and Pakistan, the real central front in the war on terror.

Ladies and gentlemen, in recent years and in recent days, we've once again seen the consequences of the neglect of this neglect, with Russia challenging the very freedom of a new democratic country of Georgia. Barack and I will end that neglect. We will hold Russia accountable for its actions, and we will help the people of Georgia rebuild.

I've been on the ground in Georgia, Iraq, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and I can tell you in no uncertain terms: This administration's policy has been an abysmal failure.

America cannot afford four more years of this failure. And now, now, despite being complicit in this catastrophic foreign policy, John McCain says Barack Obama is not ready to protect our national security.

Now, let me ask you this: Whose judgment do you trust?

Should you trust the judgment of John McCain, when he said only three years ago, Afghanistan, we don't read about it anymore in papers because it succeeded?

Or should you believe Barack Obama who said a year ago, We need to send two more combat battalions to Afghanistan?

The fact of the matter is, al Qaeda and the Taliban, the people who actually attacked us on 9/11, they've regrouped in the mountains between Afghanistan and Pakistan and they are plotting new attacks. And the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has echoed Barack's call for more troops.

John McCain was wrong, and Barack Obama was right.

Should we trust John McCain's judgment when he rejected talking with Iran and then asked, What is there to talk about? Or Barack Obama, who said, We must talk and make clear to Iran that it must change?

Now, after seven years of denial, even the Bush administration recognizes that we should talk to Iran because that's the best way to ensure our security.

Again and again, John McCain has been wrong, and Barack Obama is right.

Should we trust John McCain's judgment when he says we can't have no timelines to draw down our troops from Iraq, that we must stay indefinitely? Or should we listen to Barack Obama, who says shift the responsibility to the Iraqis and set a time to bring our combat troops home?

Now, after six long years, the administration and the Iraqi government are on the verge of setting a date to bring our troops home. John McCain was wrong, and Barack Obama was right.

Again and again, on the most important national security issues of our time, John McCain was wrong, and Barack Obama has been proven right.

Folks, remember when the world used to trust us, when they looked to us for leadership? With Barack Obama as our president, they'll look at us again, they'll trust us again, and we'll be able to lead again.

Folks, Jill and I are truly honored to join Michelle and Barack on this journey. When I look at their young children, when I look at my grandchildren, I know why I'm here.

I'm here for their future. I'm here for everyone I grew up with in Scranton and Wilmington. I'm here for the cops and the firefighters, the teachers and the assembly line workers, the folks whose lives are the very measure of whether the American dream endures.

Our greatest presidents, from Abraham Lincoln to Franklin Roosevelt to John Kennedy, they all challenged us to embrace change. Now it is our responsibility to meet that challenge.

Millions of Americans have been knocked down. And this is the time as Americans together we get back up, back up together.

Our debt to our parents and our grandparents is too great. Our
obligation to our children is too sacred. These are extraordinary
times; this is an extraordinary election.

The American people are ready. I am ready. Barack is ready. This is his time; this is our time; this is America's time.

God bless America, and may God protect our troops. Thank you very
much. Thank you.

Well, I told you exactly what I thought, and it was true. I, I was
very satisfied in the job I had as chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, and I thought I could help the ticket that way. And but
Barack asked me to do it and I had committed to him, and if he wanted
me, whatever he wanted me to do, I'd do, because I think this election
is so critical.

She had a number of good ones. Look, she's a smart, tough politician,
and so I, I think she's going to be very formidable. But you know,
eventually she's going to have to sit in front of you like I'm doing
and have done. Eventually she's going to have to answer questions and
not be sequestered. Eventually she's going to have to answer questions
about her record.

I didn't call anybody. I didn't. I happened to be I didn't get her I
didn't see her speech, I saw part of it. I we were, we were flying
to from Florida to Virginia, and I caught the tail end of it. And oh,
I guess I actually, I called my wife. I called my wife.

She said she thought she was tough. She thought she was tough and she
was a good politician. And so, you know, but who knows where this is
going to go. You know, it's early in the process and the voters are
going to make judgments about Sarah Palin and Joe Biden, and but the
truth is they're mostly going to make judgments about Barack Obama and
John McCain. Vice presidents are useful, but we're not, we're not
determinative.

Well, in, in the sense I know Mitt Romney and know his positions, and
I know Tom Ridge and I really respect them. And but you know, I, I've
debated an awful lot of tough, smart women. A woman who's a judge here
in our superior court was one of my toughest opponents ever for the
Senate. And there's a lot of very tough, smart women in the United
States Senate I debate every day. So in that sense it's not new. But
what is new is I have no idea what her policies are. I assume they're
the same as John's. I just don't know.

Well look, I, I live with a lot of smart women. My wife is a professor
and hard-working person. My daughter. You know, I think it's kind of
demeaning to suggest that all women are going to vote for a woman just
because she's a woman even when she's diametrically opposed to
everything Hillary stands for. I mean, I hear this talk about, you
know, is she going to pick up Hillary voters? Well, I so far I haven't
heard one single policy position, one single position that she has in
common with Hillary. So I, I just think, you know, all folks are a
little more discriminating than just merely whether or not it's the
same sex or the same ethnicity or whatever. But we'll see, we'll
see. The truth is, I don't know.

Oh, no, I don't think so. I mean, I think it's well, I don't look,
that's for voters to decide. You're not going to see anything
elitist look, what you hear immediately from Barack Obama and Joe
Biden, families off-limits and we mean it, that the personal stuff
relating to some of the stuff that was popping out on, on the talk
shows is just inappropriate. She's going to be judged, I assume, the
same way I'm going to be judged. What does she know, what does she
think, what's her record, what's she going to do? And as I look down
the road, that's how I've always debated whoever I've debated,
including the really tough women I work with, smart women, in the
Senate. So I, I, I really don't view this any differently. I may be
surprised here down the road. But, but, you know, I'm just looking
forward to debating her. I mean, why–look, she had a great speech. But
what was–her silence on the issues was deafening. She didn't mention a
word about healthcare, a word about the environment, a word about the
middle class. They never parted her lips. I mean, so I don't know
where she is on those things.

Oh, I, I think we got the bounce and they got the bounce and then it
ended up right where it was before. Look, Barack and I have never
thought this was going to be anything other than a close election down
to the wire. This is going to get down to, you know, I think we're
going to be you're going to be sitting up very late at night deciding

I know you have. I hope hopefully, you're not going to be in a
position where we're going to be recounting anything. But look,
I–we've assumed from the beginning this is going to be a close, tough
race. This is a historic race. You have not only in terms of the
candidates, but the time. You said before the if you don't mind me
saying, we were sitting here, you said, Look, John McCain had this
gigantic number of people watching. Barack had 38 and he had 39
million or whatever it was, but more than ever watched a
convention. People are focused, man. Their lives, as they view it,
their standing in the middle class, their standing in the world,
depends on it. So I think this is going to be a very focused election.

Well, I think she is a big player, and you know, as a matter of fact,
I hope I'll be campaigning with her in some of those states,
particularly in Pennsylvania and Ohio. She's indicated she's prepared
to do it. Bill Clinton's indicated to me he's prepared to go anywhere
and campaign with us. That's a process being worked out now, how to
mechanically do that. But no, no, I think, I think Hillary's going to
play a major role here. She's a major force in not only a Democratic
Party, she's a major force in American politics.

My guess is all three. My guess is we'll occasionally be side by side
with me, with Barack, and I imagine independently as well.

Well, that's a little above my pay grade, to use the phrase. I mean,
it's a decision the campaign made before I got on the campaign, before
I was picked, but

But no, I think, I think you're going to learn more from having look,
you just got finished pointing out how many people watched this. I
think those debates that are going to take place, the three critical
debates between the two nominees, are going to be the most watched
debates in the history of American politics, and I think people are
going to get everything they need out of those debates, plus they're
going to have an opportunity to–look, another reason why, in my view I
can't speak for the campaign, because I haven't gotten into I mean, I
just got on the ticket is that, you know, we have a different
focus. For example, I'm headed to we think we can win Montana. Now,
you know, they'd like very much to not, not spend a lot of time in
Montana and Virginia and another 12 states or so that were Republican
states we think we can compete in and win. And so when you decide on
doing, you know, a campaign, a town hall, you know, every week, what
you do, you significantly constrain your ability to get to places
where Democratic candidates haven't spent much time before.

No. The surge helped make that what made is possible in Anbar province
is they did what I'd suggested two and a half years ago: gave local
control. They turned over and they said to the Sunnis in Anbar
province, We promise you, don't worry, you're not going to have any
Shia in here. There's going to be no national forces in here. We're
going to train your forces to help you fight al-Qaeda. And that
you–what you had was the awakening. The awakening was not an awakening
by us, it was an awakening of the Sunnis in Anbar province willing to
fight.

Willing to fight. Cooperating with no, they weren't cooperating with
Shiite. They didn't cooperate with the Shiites.

No, no, no. No, they didn't cooperate with the Shiites. It's
still–it's a big problem, Tom. You got–we're paying 300 bucks a month
to each of those guys. Now the problem has been and the, and the
promise was made by Maliki that they would be integrated into the
overall military. That's a process that is beginning in fits and
starts now, but it's far from over. Far from–look, the bottom line
here is that it's–let's–the surge is over. Here's the real
point. Whether or not the surge worked is almost irrelevant now. We're
in a new deal. What is the administration doing? They're doing what
Barack Obama has suggested over 14 months ago, turn responsibility
over and draw down our troops. We're about to get a deal from the
president of the United States and Maliki, the head of the Iraqi
government, that's going to land on my desk as chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee saying we're going to set a timeline to draw down
our forces. The only guy in America out of step is John McCain. John
McCain's saying no timeline. They've signed on to Barack Obama's
proposal.

Well, it did help make it possible. It did help. But it's not the
reason. Look, they also–take a look at the analysis, Tom. They say the
reason why there's such success against the, the insurgency is because
of now small, very well trained counterinsurgency units. It's not the
numbers, it's the type of units that are in there. What I was arguing
about before was we have the wrong units in there. We have the wrong
kind of force in there. We weren't focused on counterinsurgency.

And so look–but, but, but the bottom line is we can argue about
whether the surge was good, bad or indifferent. Let's assume it was
all good. The truth of the matter is, what do we do now? What's John
McCain going to do when he's president? He says he will not sign on to
a timeline, number one. Number two, he has no, no idea, no suggestion
how he's going to deal with the neighbors. He has no idea how he's
going to deal with Iraq. He has no idea how he's going to deal with
Syria. He has no idea how he's going to deal with Turkey. We have laid
out a clear plan.

That's exact–not, not a partition. You guys keep saying that. It was
never a partition.

Not true. Absolutely, positively not true.

No, no. That wasn't it. There was a central government that had power,
but there was more power given to the localities like exist right
now. Tom, tell me, what's changed up among, among the Kurds? You still
not–cannot, under the Iraqi constitution, send an Iraqi army up
there. You still not–cannot fly an Iraqi flag up there unless you get
permission. Tell me what's happened in Anbar province. There are no
Sunnis in Anbar province–I mean, Shia in Anbar province. It is de
facto exactly what I said. That's what's working. Everything that's
working in Iraq has been the bottom up approach, not a strong central
government imposing. And the truth of the matter is the only way
you're going to make this–sustain it, the question is, how do we leave
and leave a stable Iraq behind? Without a political settlement, Tom,
we're going to be back there in another year or two or three or five.

Yes, I am encouraged, because they're doing the things I
suggested. They're localizing it, Tom. That's why it is moving toward
some mild possibility of a resolution. And if you were to now follow
up–if John McCain as president, would follow up like we will as
president and say, OK, how do you get the rest of the neighborhood in
the deal? How do you get, how do you get Iran and Syria to stop
supporting the–specifically, the Shia? And every–you know, this talk
about how this has been such a great success, look where we are now in
the Middle East. You now have a Shia-dominated government close to
Iran. What's Maliki do? When Ahmadinejad comes, he kisses him on both
cheek and seeks permission. So give me a break about how this is such
a great political success.

We have the bravest soldiers in the world. I said at the time of the
surge, if we sent in 500,000 troops we could tamp this down
immediately, shut it down and end all violence. But that would not
solve the problem. What do we do when we leave? What's left behind?
And that's the hard work, and that requires the region as well. And
you don't hear a word from John about that–John McCain. You don't hear
a word from Sarah Palin about that. But you do now from the
administration. The administration's now signing on to Barack Obama's
plan to set a timeline, to–not the exact plan, but to set a timeline
to draw down American troops.

If there is an Obama-Biden administration, yeah. If there is a John
McCain administration and Sarah Palin, I think it's probably not going
to happen, because John does not view this in terms of the region. I
never heard him speak about how he's going to integrate Iraq into the
region where you have these competing interests that exist. And I, I,
I just–now, John may have an idea. I've never heard it. I've never
heard it. And by the way, that Biden proposal, 75 senators voted for
it, including the majority of the Republican Party.

Well, the Iraqi government–Maliki didn't, but the rest of the
government liked it.

Yeah–by the way, it is their country, but he's the head of the
government, but he's the head of the government whose popularity is
very much in question, and the election itself. You had a whole lot of
people–look, here's going to be the key, Tom. They're about to have
regional elections. Let's see how they go. Let's see how the regional
elections go. Pray God they'll go well for the sake of all of our sons
that are there.

Well, no, it's not fair, but I don't think that's what's going to
happen. I talked to Secretary Paulson last night. I'm not at liberty
to lay out what he told me, because he should announce it today. But
there's three principles that have to play here for this to work, in
my view. One, you have to make sure that you help homeowners and
stabilize, at the same time, financial institutions. Secondly, you got
to make sure that you're not bailing out shareholders vs. the
taxpayers. And the third thing you got to do is make sure that they're
still in a position to be able to continue to lend, because there is a
need for them to continue to have this elasticity of being able to
deal with the market. Now, what I've heard the outline of, I am–I want
to wait till I see all the detail, but if it meets those three
principles, then I think it has a great chance of succeeding. And as I
understand it, whatever proposal Secretary Paulson is going to make is
a proposal to get us over this hump of instability and
uncertainty. It's not an official reorganization. It will be left to
the next administration and the Congress to make those judgments.

They should. They should. We'll see what the plan is.

Absolutely not. My son graduated from Yale Law School. The starting
salary in Wall Street is $140,000 a year if you want to
lawyer. Options he had. He came home to work for a bank. Surprise,
surprise, number one. Number two, this is the second largest employer
in the state. All the contributions added up make up less than 2
percent of the contributions I've received. Number three, I blocked
the bank–first three bankruptcy bills that the credit card companies
wanted. I would not support a bankruptcy bill until they did three
things. They put women and children first. Every single social welfare
agency relating to alimony and child support supported this
bill. Eight-five senators supported this bill. So try as people might
to make to this out.

You want to know whether or not I am in the pocket of the corporate
lobbyists, which makes it apply–sounds like it's right here. Ask the
people in the industry here how happy they are. How happy the DuPont
company is with me and the Hercules Corporation that I would not sign
on the asbestos bill. How happy they are with me–look, the fact of the
matter is, that I have had an entire career that no one has every
questioned whether or not anybody has influenced me, number one. No
group has ever, ever been involved with more than–contributing more
than 2 percent to my campaign. I'm listed as the 98th or 99th of the
100 poorest guy in the Senate in terms of net worth. I have a 35-year
career of actually, of being viewed, at least in my state, as being
independent. And so you can take individual votes and you can talk
about them, but they're totally out of context, Tom.

Well, and most people thought differently. But how come the social
welfare agencies supported it, Tom? Are they a bunch of radical,
corporate whatever? How come 89–or 85 United States senators supported
it? Now, Barack voted a different way. I respect his vote. The
question is, is the glass half-full or half-empty? Fewer than 10
percent of all the filers in bankruptcy are even affected. I'm the guy
that insisted there be a safe harbor, that no one making under $50,000
or $49,000 could even be considered in this.

And look, the big issue people have is what about people who go
bankrupt because of their healthcare bills. That's why we need
national health insurance. Are we going to say to every doctor and
hospital, Look, you get to write off your bill, get to write off your
bill because people can't pay. The way to do that, that's a societal
responsibility, not the responsibility of individual doctors
and–assuming they're charging a fair price. And so look, and everybody
else voted–not everybody. The vast majority of the members of the
Congress voted that way.

My son has never spoken. I voted for every campaign reform that's
existed with regard to lobbyists. I voted for every single solitary
proposal to make it tougher. And if you ask around here, ask–try to
find how many lobbyists have actually–I probably have spoken to
lobbyists, but I don't–it's not a practice I have. If they want to see
me, the CEO has to come and see me from the company.

Well, what, what they would do is they'd stop them from writing the
bills. They wouldn't be sitting like Cheney was with lobbyists,
writing an energy policy. They'd get to have their voice. Look, there
is a thing called free speech. They get to petition their
government. But in terms of their ability to be able to set the
agenda, write legislation, be these–and my–you know, it's just, it
would not–it just a total different atmosphere. A totally different
atmosphere, just like it was 25 years ago when it didn't become such a
growth industry.

Actually, I haven't talked often about my faith. I seldom talk about
my faith. Other people talk about my faith.

I'd say, Look, I know when it begins for me. It's a personal and
private issue. For me, as a Roman Catholic, I'm prepared to accept the
teachings of my church. But let me tell you. There are an awful lot of
people of great confessional faiths–Protestants, Jews, Muslims and
others–who have a different view. They believe in God as strongly as I
do. They're intensely as religious as I am religious. They believe in
their faith and they believe in human life, and they have differing
views as to when life–I'm prepared as a matter of faith to accept that
life begins at the moment of conception. But that is my judgment. For
me to impose that judgment on everyone else who is equally and maybe
even more devout than I am seems to me is inappropriate in a
pluralistic society. And I know you get the push back, Well, what
about fascism? Everybody, you know, you going to say fascism's all
right? Fascism isn't a matter of faith. No decent religious person
thinks fascism is a good idea.

No, what a voted against curtailing the right, criminalizing
abortion. I voted against telling everyone else in the country that
they have to accept my religiously based view that it's a moment of
conception. There is a debate in our church, as Cardinal Egan would
acknowledge, that's existed. Back in Summa Theologia, when Thomas
Aquinas wrote Summa Theologia, he said there was no–it didn't occur
until quickening, 40 days after conception. How am I going out and
tell you, if you or anyone else that you must insist upon my view that
is based on a matter of faith? And that's the reason I haven't. But
then again, I also don't support a lot of other things. I don't
support public, public funding. I don't, because that flips the
burden. That's then telling me I have to accept a different view. This
is a matter between a person's God, however they believe in God, their
doctor and themselves in what is always a–and what we're going to be
spending our time doing is making sure that we reduce considerably the
amount of abortions that take place by providing the care, the
assistance and the encouragement for people to be able to carry to
term and to raise their children.

Well, that's true. And look, Joe's been my friend for years. Our
children are friends, his daughter-in-law was in my son's wedding, we
go back a long way. Every time I see Joe these days, I walk up and I
say, Say it ain't so, Joe. Say it ain't so. And look, Joe's made a
judgment. Joe's going to have to make a tougher judgment when this
election is over.

Well, look. I don't want to personalize this election. Like I said, I
heard Sarah Palin and John McCain talk about change. Tell me one
single thing they're going to do on the economy, foreign policy,
taxes, that is going to be change. Name me one. This is such
malarkey. Ninety percent of the time, John votes with the
president. Same tax cut, he jumps on his tax cut proposal, which was
disastrous, he jumps on his foreign policy, which has been a complete
and utter failure. He jumps on the whole idea that he has about how to
deal with healthcare, which is to tax. John wants to tax healthcare
benefits for people who get their healthcare from their employers?
Tell me where the change is. My goodness. He may change on how he
deals with a lobbyist, but the idea on the economy, healthcare,
education, same outfit, same deal, no change.

Well, it's great to be here! On the steps of the old State House in the land of Lincoln. President Lincoln once instructed us to be sure to put your feet in the right place. Then stand firm. Today, Springfield, I know my feet are in the right place. And I am proud to stand firm for the next president of the United States of America, Barack Obama. Folks, Barack and I come from very different places, but we share a common story. An American story. He was the son of a single mom, a single mom who had to struggle to support her son and her kids. But she raised him. She raised him to believe in America. to believe that in this country there is no obstacle that could keep you from your dreams. If you are willing to work hard and fight for it. I was different. I was an Irish-Catholic kid from Scranton with a father who like many of yours in tough economic times fell on hard times, but my mom and dad raised me to believe, it's a saying Barack you heard me say before, my dad repeated it and repeated it. Said champ, it's not how many times you get knocked down, it's how quickly you get up. It's how quickly you get up. Ladies and gentlemen, that's your story. That's America's story. It's about if you get up, you can make it.

That's the America Barack Obama and I believe in. That's the American dream. And ladies and gentlemen, is there no ordinary times, and this is no ordinary election. Because the truth of the matter is, and you know it, that American dream under eight years of Bush and McCain, that American dream is slipping away. I don't have to tell you that. You feel it in your lives. You see it in your shrinking wages, and the cost of everything from groceries to health care to college to filling up your car at the gas station. It keeps going up and up and up, and the future keeps receding further and further and further away as you reach for your dreams. You know, ladies and gentlemen, it is not a mere political saying. I say with every fiber of my being I believe we cannot as a nation stand for four more years of this. We cannot afford to keep giving tax cuts after tax cuts to big corporations and the wealthiest Americans while the middle class America, middle class families are falling behind and their wages are actually shrinking. We can't afford four more years of a government that does nothing while they watch the housing market collapse. As you know, it's not just the millions of people facing foreclosure. It's the tens of millions of your neighbors who are seeing the values of their homes drop off a cliff along with their dreams.

Ladies and gentlemen, your kitchen table is like mine. You sit there at night before you put the kids after you put the kids to bed and you talk, you talk about what you need. You talk about how much you are worried about being able to pay the bills. Well, ladies and gentlemen, that's not a worry John McCain has to worry about. It's a pretty hard experience. He'll have to figure out which of the seven kitchen tables to sit at. Folks, again, it's not political sloganary when I say we literally can't afford four more years of this non-energy policy written by and for the oil companies, making us more and more dependent from hostile nations on our ability to run this country and literally, not figuratively, literally putting America's security at risk, we can't afford four more years of a foreign policy that has shredded our alliances and sacrificed our moral standing around the world.

Ladies and gentlemen, that's the bad news. But there is good news, America. We don't have to have four more years of George W. Bush. And John McCain. The next President of the United States is going to be delivered to the most significant moment in American history since Franklin Roosevelt. He will have such an incredible opportunity, incredible opportunity, not only to change the direction of America, but literally, literally to change the direction of the world. Barack Obama and I believe, we believe with every fiber in our being that our families, our communities as Americans, there's not a single solitary challenge we cannot face if we level with the American people. And I don't say that to say it; history, history has shown it. When have Americans ever, ever, ever, let their country down when they've had a leader to lead them?

--

Ladies and gentlemen, we believe that our tomorrows will be better than our yesterdays, and we believe we'll pass on to our children an even better life than the one we lived. That literally has been the American way, and it can be that way again. But there's a big, missing piece. The missing piece is leadership.

In all my time in the United States Senate, and I want you to know there's only four senators senior to me, but Barack, there's still 44 older than me. I want you to know that part. But all kidding aside, of all my years in the Senate, I have never in my life seen Washington so broken. I have never seen so many dreams denied and so many decisions deferred by politicians who are trying like the devil to escape their responsibility and accountability. But, ladies and gentlemen, the reckoning is now. And the reality, the reality is that we must answer the call or we will risk the harshest version and verdict of history. These times call for a total change in Washington's worldview. These times require more than a good soldier. They require a wise leader. A leader a leader who can deliver. A leader who can deliver the change we need.

I'll say straight up to you - John McCain and the press knows this, is genuinely a friend of mine. I've known John for 35 years. He served our country with extraordinary courage and I know he wants to do right by America. But the harsh truth is, ladies and gentlemen, you can't change America when you boast. And these are John's words, quote, the most important issues of our day, I've been totally in agreement and support of President Bush. Ladies and gentlemen, that's what he said. You can't change America when you supported George Bush's policies 95% of the time. You can't change America when you believe, and these are his own words, that in the Bush administration we've made great progress economically. You can't change America and make things better for our senior citizens when you signed on to Bush's scheme of privatizing social security. You can't change America and give our workers a fighting chance when after 3 million manufacturing jobs disappear, you continue to support tax breaks for companies who ship our jobs overseas. You can't change America and end this war in Iraq when you declare and, again, these are John's words, no one has supported President Bush in Iraq more than I have, end of quote. Ladies and gentlemen, you can't change America, you can't change America when you know your first four years as president will look exactly like the last eight years of George Bush's presidency.

My friends yes, we can. My friends, I don't have to tell you, this election year the choice is clear. One man stands ready to deliver change we desperately need. A man I'm proud to call my friend. A man who will be the next president of the United States, Barack Amer -

You know, you learn a lot of things being up close with a guy. Let me tell you about Obama. You learn a lot about a man when you campaign with him. When you debate him 12 or 13 times. When you hear him speak. When you see how he thinks. And you watch how he reacts under pressure. You learn a lot about his strength of his mind, and I think even more importantly, the quality of his heart. Ladies and gentlemen, no one knows better than I do that presidential campaigns are crucibles in which you're tested and challenged every single day. And over the past 18 months, I've watched Barack meet those challenges with judgment, intelligence, and steel in his spine. I've watched as he's inspired millions of Americans, millions of Americans to this new cause.

And during those 18 months, I must tell you, frankly, I've been disappointed in my friend, John McCain, who gave in to the right wing of his party and yielded to the very swiftboat politics that he so once so deplored. And folks, campaigns for presidents are a test of character and leadership. And in this campaign, one candidate, one candidate has passed that test.

Barack has the vision, and what you can't forget, you know his vision, but let me tell you something. He also has the courage, the courage to make this a better place, and let me tell you something else, this man is a clear eyed pragmatist who will get the job done. I watch with amazement as he came to the Senate. I watch with amazement. He made his mark literally from day one reaching across the aisle to pass legislation to secure the world's deadliest weapons, standing up to some of the most entrenched interests in Washington, risking the wrath of the old order to pass the most sweeping ethics reform in a generation. But I was proudest, I was proudest, when I watched him spontaneously focus the attention of the nation on the shameful neglect of America's wounded warriors at Walter Reed Army Hospital. Ladies and gentlemen, I know I'm told I talk too colloquially, but there's something about this guy. There's something about this guy. There's something about Barack Obama that allows him to bring people together like no one I have worked with and seen. There's something about Barack Obama that makes people understand if they make compromises they can make things better.

It's been amazing to watch him. But then again, that's been the story of his whole life. I end where I began. This is a man raised by a single mother who sometimes was on food stamps as she worked to put herself through school, by grandparents from the prairies of Kansas who loved him, a grandfather, a grandfather who marched in Paton's Army and then came home and went to college on the G.I. Bill, and a grandmother, a grandmother with just a high school education, started off working in a small bank in the secretarial pool and rose to be vice president of that bank. Ladies and gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, these remarkable people gave Barack Obama the determination and drive, and, yes, the values to turn down that big job on Wall Street, to come to Chicago's south side, where he helped workers help themselves after the steel mills had been shut down and the jobs disappeared.

Ladies and gentlemen, my wife Jill, who you'll meet soon, is drop dead gorgeous. My wife Jill, who you'll meet soon, she also has her doctorate degree, which is a problem. But all kidding aside, my Jill, my Jill, my wife Jill and I are honored to join Barack and Michelle on this journey, because that's what it is. it's a journey. We share the same values, the values that we had passed on to us by our parents and the values Jill and I are passing on to our sons Beau and Hunter and Ashley.

Ladies and gentlemen, I'm here for their future. I'm here for the future of your kids. I'm here for everyone I - I'm here for everyone I grew up in Scranton, Pennsylvania, who's been forgotten and everybody in Claymont, Delaware, in Wilmington where I lived. I'm here for the cops and the fire fighters, the teachers and the line workers, the folks who live - the folks whose lives are the measure of whether the American dream endures.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is no ordinary time. This is no ordinary
election. And this may be our last chance to reclaim the America we
love, to restore America's soul. Ladies and gentlemen, America gave
Jill and me our chance. It gave Barack and Michelle their chance to
stand on this stage today. It's literally incredible. These values,
this country gave us that chance. And now it's time for all of us, as
Lincoln said, to put our feet in the right place and to stand
firm. Ladies and gentlemen, it's time to elect Barack Obama
president. It's our time. It's America's time. God bless America, and
may he protect our troops.

I want to thank a few people for making this event possible: President Jack Degioia, Dean Bob Gallucci, Vice President of Federal Relations Scott Flemming, the College Democrats and their President Adam Feiler, and the Georgetown Lecture Fund.

When people say this is the most important election in my lifetime, they're right.

So much is at stake.

The physical security of our children. The retirement security of our parents. The economic and health security of our families.

And, above all else, the national security of our country, which is a President's first responsibility.

I start from a simple premise: we cannot afford another four years of Republican stewardship of our nation's security.

After eight years of the Bush Administration, our country is less secure and more isolated than it has been at any time in recent history. This administration has dug America into a very deep hole – with very few friends to help us climb out.

* * *

It doesn't have to be this way. The next President will have an awesome responsibility – but also the greatest opportunity since FDR – to change the direction of our country… and the world.

It starts with a much clearer understanding of how the world has changed over the past two decades. As Yeats wrote in Easter 1916, our world has changed utterly, a terrible beauty has been born.

The emergence of China and India as major economic powers. The resurgence of Russia floating on a sea of oil. A unifying Europe. The spread of dangerous weapons and lethal diseases. The shortage of secure sources of energy, water and even food. The impact of climate change. Rising wealth and persistent poverty. A technological revolution that sends people, ideas and money hurtling around the planet at ever faster speeds. The challenge to nation states from ethnic and sectarian strife. The struggle between modernity and extremism.

That's a short list of the forces shaping the 21st century. No one country can control these forces, but more than any other country, we have an ability to affect them – if we use the totality of our strength.

Our military might and economic resources are necessary but not sufficient to lead us into this new century. It is our ideas and ideals that will allow us to exert the kind of leadership that persuades others to follow and to deal effectively with these forces of change.

Over the next few months, I'll speak in detail about how Democrats will exert that kind of leadership.

For today, I want to concentrate on this administration. It has squandered our ability to shape this new world. It has put virtually all of these issues on the back burner, failing to devote the intellectual capital and constant effort they require. It has destroyed faith in America's judgment. And it has devalued America's moral leadership in the world.

Instead, this administration has focused to the point of obsession on the so-called war on terrorism and produced a one-size-fits-all doctrine of military preemption and regime change ill suited to the challenges we face.

It has made fear the main driver of our foreign policy. It has turned a deadly serious but manageable threat – a small number of radical groups that hate America – into a ten-foot tall existential monster that dictates nearly every move we make.

Even if you look at the world through this administration's distorted lens, you see a failed policy.

This failure flows from a dangerous combination of ideology and incompetence and a profound confusion about whom we're fighting.

It starts with the very language the President has tried to impose: the global war on terror. That is simply wrong. Terrorism is a means, not an end, and very different groups and countries are using it toward very different goals. If we can't even identify the enemy or describe the war we're fighting, it's difficult to see how we will win.

The most urgent threat is the intersection of the world's most radical groups – like Al Qaeda – with the world's most lethal weapons.

But we also must confront groups that use terror not to target us directly, but to advance their own nationalistic causes. We must deal with outlaw states that support them and otherwise flout the rules. We must face a civil war in Iraq, a renewed war for Afghanistan, and an ideological war for the future of Pakistan. We must help resolve a historic conflict between Arabs and Israelis.

And we must contend with Iran, especially its efforts to acquire the capacity to build a nuclear weapon.

This administration spent five years fixated on changing the Iranian regime. No one likes the regime, but think about the logic: renounce the bomb – and when you do, we're still going to take you down. The result is that Iran accelerated its efforts to produce fissile material and is closer now to the bomb than when Bush took office.

Instead of regime change, we should focus on conduct change. We should make it very clear to Iran what it risks in terms of isolation if it continues to pursue a dangerous nuclear program but also what it stands to gain if it does the right thing.

That will require keeping our allies in Europe, as well as Russia and China, on the same page as we ratchet up pressure. But is also means doing much more to reach out to Iran – including through direct talks – to exploit cracks within the ruling elite and between Iran's rulers and its people, who are struggling economically and stifled politically. The Iranian people need to know that their government, not the United States, is choosing confrontation over cooperation.

Saber rattling is the most self-defeating policy imaginable. It forces Iranians who despise the regime to rally behind their leaders and spurs instability in the Middle East, which adds to the price of oil, with the proceeds going right into Tehran's pockets. The worst nightmare for a regime that thrives on isolation and tension is an America ready, willing and able to engage. It's amazing how little faith this administration has in the power of America's ideas and ideals.

All these fronts throughout the Middle East and South Asia are connected. But this administration has wrongly conflated them under one label, and argued that success on one front ensures victory on the others. It has lumped together, as a single threat, extremist groups and states more at odds with each other than with us. It has picked the wrong fights at the wrong time, failing to finish a war of necessity in Afghanistan before starting a war of choice in Iraq.

The result is that, to quote the findings of the most recent National Intelligence Estimate on the Terrorist Threat: Al Qaeda is better positioned to strike the West… [it has] regenerated… and remains determined to attack us at home.

Of course, we must destroy Al Qaeda.

But instead of rolling back the threat it poses, this administration's approach has helped produce a global breakout of extremism, which now threatens more people in more places than it did before 9-11.

So even on its own terms, the national security strategy of this administration has been a failure. We cannot afford four more years.

* * *

Last month, a man I greatly admire and consider a friend, Senator John McCain, set out his vision for our foreign policy.

To his credit, John repudiates some of the Bush administration's approach to the world. He recognizes that the power of our example is as important as the example of our power… that allies we respect, not disdain, can advance our interests. He is especially eloquent about his abhorrence for war – as John is uniquely placed to be.

But John McCain remains wedded to the Bush Administration's myopic view of a world defined by terrorism. He would continue to allow a tiny minority to set the agenda for the overwhelming majority.

It is time for a total change in Washington's world view. That will require more than a great soldier. It will require a wise leader.

Nowhere is this truer than in Iraq. The war dominates our national life. It stands like a boulder in the road between us and the credibility we need to lead in the world and the flexibility we require to meet our challenges at home.

When it comes to Iraq, there is no daylight between John McCain and George W. Bush. They are joined at the hip.

When it comes to Iraq, there will be no change with a McCain administration… and so there is a real and profound choice for Americans in November.

* * *

Like President Bush, Senator McCain likes to talk about the dire consequences of drawing down our forces in Iraq.

He argues that Iraq is the meeting point for two of the greatest threats to America: Al Qaeda and Iran.

It's an argument laden with irony. After all, who opened Iraq's door to Al Qaeda and Iran? The Bush administration.

Al Qaeda in Iraq is a Bush-fulfilling prophecy: it wasn't there before the war, but it is there now. As to Iran, its influence in Iraq went from zero to sixty when we toppled Saddam's Sunni regime and gave Shi'ite religious parties inspired and nurtured by Iran a path to power.

No matter how we got to this point, President Bush and Senator McCain argue that if we start to leave, it will further empower Al Qaeda and Iran.

I believe they are exactly wrong. And so do a large number of very prominent retired military and national security experts who testified before the Foreign Relations Committee this month.

Would drawing down really strengthen Al Qaeda in Iraq and give it a launching pad to attack America?

Or would it help eliminate what little indigenous Iraqi support Al Qaeda in Iraq retains?

Most Sunni Arabs have turned on Al Qaeda in Iraq, alienated by their tactics and ideology. Al Qaeda in Iraq is down to about 2000 Iraqis and a small number of foreigners whose almost exclusive focus is Iraq. When we draw down, the most likely result is that Iraqis of all confessions will stamp out its remnants – and we can retain a residual force in or near Iraq to help them finish the job.

Last week, I asked our ambassador to Iraq, Ryan Crocker, to tell us where al Qaeda poses a greater threat to America's security: in Iraq, or in Afghanistan and Pakistan. He said: Afghanistan and Pakistan.

So what about Al Qaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan – the people who actually attacked us on 9-11? If we draw down, would they be emboldened?

Or, to paraphrase the National Intelligence Estimate on Terrorism, would they lose one of their most effective recruiting tools – the notion that we're in Iraq to stay, with permanent military bases and control over the oil? And would they finally risk the full measure of America's might?

Senator McCain has taken a lot of heat for saying he would not mind if American troops stay in Iraq for a hundred years. The truth is, he was trying to make an analogy to our long term presence in peaceful post-war Germany, post-armistice Korea and post-Dayton Bosnia.

But Germany, Korea or Bosnia after the peace are nothing like Iraq today – with thousands of bombs, hundreds of American injured and dozens of American killed every month – and there is little prospect Iraq will look like them anytime soon.

Worse, saying you're happy to stay in Iraq for one hundred years fuels exactly the kind of dangerous conspiracy theories about America's intentions throughout the Arab and Muslim worlds that we should be working to dispel.

What about Iran? Would drawing down increase its already huge influence in Iraq? Or would it shift the burden of helping to stabilize Iraq from us to them and make our forces a much more credible deterrent to Iran's wider misbehavior?

The idea that we could or even should wipe out every vestige of Iran's influence in Iraq is a fantasy. Even with 160,000 American troops in Iraq, our ally in Baghdad greets Iran's leader with kisses. Like it or not, Iran is a major regional power and it shares a long border – and a long history – with Iraq.

Right now, Iran loves the status quo, with 140,000 Americans troops bogged down and bleeding, caught in a cross fire of intra Shi'a rivalry and Sunni-Shi'a civil war.

The challenge for us is not eliminating all Iranian influence in Iraq, but forcing Iran to confront the specter of a disintegrating Iraq or all-out war between different Shi'a factions.

By drawing down, we can take away Iran's ability to wage a proxy war against our troops and force Tehran to concentrate on avoiding turmoil inside Iraq's borders and instability beyond them.

Finally, would our responsible draw down accelerate sectarian chaos?

Or would it cause Iraq's leaders and Iraq's Sunni Arab neighbors to finally act responsibly? To date, both have used our large presence as a crutch or an excuse for inaction. When that stops, they will have to start to fill the vacuum or put their interests at much greater risk.

* * *

We should debate the consequences of drawing down in Iraq. But more importantly, we should talk about what both President Bush and Senator McCain refuse to acknowledge: the increasingly intolerable costs of staying.

The risks of drawing down are debatable. The costs of staying with 140,000 troops are knowable – and they get steeper every day:

• The continued loss of the lives and limbs of our soldiers;

• The emotional and economic strain on our troops and their families due to repeated, extended tours, as Army Chief of Staff General George Casey recently told Congress;

• The drain on our Treasury – $12 billion every month;

• The impact on the readiness of our armed forces – tying down so many troops that, as Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Richard Cody said, we don't have any left over to deal with a new emergency; and

• The inability to send enough soldiers to the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan, where Al Qaeda has regrouped and is plotting new attacks.

When I visited Afghanistan in February, General McNeil, who commands the international force, told me that with two extra combat brigades – about 10,000 soldiers – he could turn around the security situation in the south, where the Taliban is on the move. But he can't get them because of Iraq.

Even when we do pull troops out of Iraq, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Admiral Mullen, says he would want to send them home for a year to rest and retrain before sending them to Afghanistan.

The longer we stay in Iraq, the more we put off the day when we fully join the fight against the real Al Qaeda threat and finally defeat those who attacked America seven years ago.

* * *

It is long past time to clearly define our interests in Iraq.

It is not in our interest to intervene in an internal power struggle among Shi'a factions.

It is not in our interest to back one side or the other, or get caught in the cross fire of a Sunni-Shi'a civil war.

It is in our interest to start to leave Iraq without leaving chaos behind.

Even if we could keep 140,000 troops in Iraq, they will not be the deciding factor in preventing chaos. Instead, we need to focus all our remaining energy and initiative on achieving what virtually everyone agrees is the key to stability in Iraq: a political power sharing agreement among its warring factions.

I remain convinced that the only path to such a settlement is through a decentralized, federal Iraq that brings resources and responsibility down to the local and regional levels.

We need a diplomatic surge to get the world's major powers, Iraq's neighbors and Iraqis themselves invested in a sustainable political settlement.

Fifteen months into the surge that President Bush ordered and Senator McCain embraced, we've gone from drowning to treading water. We are no closer to the President's stated goal of an Iraq that can defend itself, govern itself and sustain itself in peace. We're still spending $3 billion every week and losing 30 to 40 American lives every month.

We can't keep treading water without exhausting ourselves and doing great damage to our other vital interests around the world. That's exactly what both the President and Senator McCain are asking us to do.

They can't tell us when, or even if, Iraqis will come together politically, which was the purpose of the surge in the first place.

They can't tell us when, or even if, we will draw down below pre-surge levels.

They can't tell us when, or even if, Iraq will be able to stand on its own two feet.

They can't tell us when, or even if, this war will end.

Most Americans want this war to end. They want us to come together around a plan to leave Iraq without leaving chaos behind.

They're not defeatists. They're patriots who understand the national interest – and the great things Americans can achieve if we responsibly end a war that we should not have started.

I believe it is fully within our power to do that. Then, with our credibility restored, our alliances repaired and our freedom renewed, we will once again lead the world. We will once again address the hopes, not play to the fears, of our fellow Americans.

That is my hope for next November – and for the country we all love.

May God bless America and protect our troops.

Mr. President, I am pleased that the Senate is considering H.R. 5834, a bill to reauthorize the North Korea Human Rights Act. The act underscores U.S. concern about the poor human rights conditions inside North Korea and the difficulties faced by thousands of North Koreans who have fled the country and become refugees. I support this bill because I believe our Government's approach to North Korean human rights and refugee issues must be seamlessly integrated into a coherent strategy that promotes regional peace and stability, advances core U.S. national security interests by verifiably eliminating North Korea's pursuit of nuclear weapons, and step by step encourages North Korea to adhere to international norms in the areas of human rights, security, and trade.

It is essential that the United States reach out and begin a dialogue with North Korea on issues related to basic human rights. Four years ago, I was proud to work with my colleague, Senator Brownback of Kansas, on an amendment to the North Korean Human Rights Act that created within the Department of State a Special Envoy for Human Rights in North Korea. In reauthorizing the act, the Congress expresses its intent that the envoy should be a full-time employee, and Congress elevates the post to the rank of ambassador, subject to the advice and consent of the Senate. The incumbent special envoy has pursued his duties part-time while residing outside of Washington, making coordination with the Department more difficult and limiting the overall effectiveness of his diplomatic efforts. By expressing the sense of the Congress that the new ambassador should be a full-time position, the Congress does not preclude the possibility that the President may find it desirable to nominate as ambassador an individual who already has other duties closely related to those to be pursued by the Ambassador for North Korean Human Rights Issues. Indeed, such dual assignments are not uncommon within the State Department.

The bill acknowledges that the new Ambassador for North Korean Human Rights Issues should be able to participate in policy planning and implementation with respect to refugee issues, particularly given the fact that returning refugees are among those most likely to be persecuted by North Korean authorities. But it is my expectation that the State Department's Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) will continue to play the leading role on North Korean refugee issues, engaging with China and other nations to ensure humane treatment in accordance with international norms. PRM has the staffing, expertise, congressional authorization, and experience needed to spearhead U.S. efforts in this area, and they should continue to do so.

The new Ambassador for North Korean Human Rights Issues will have to approach the job with quiet determination and considerable patience. Discussing human rights issues with North Korean authorities will not be easy, and the new ambassador will need to have both excellent diplomatic skills and a deep understanding of East Asia and the particular circumstances on the Korean Peninsula. Change will not come easily, and is more likely to flow from dialogue and engagement than from bombast and condemnation.

There are many issues on the table, ranging from family reunification visits for the thousands of Korean-Americans with relatives in the north, to ending the persecution of people of faith inside North Korea. Other humanitarian issues may also enter the mix, including food security and public health. It is my hope that the new ambassador will work with our treaty ally, South Korea, and with other countries neighboring North Korea to craft an approach to human rights issues that can, step by step, see an improvement in the lives of average North Koreans and compassionate care for those who have fled the country. In this effort, the ambassador may find it useful to draw appropriate lessons from the Helsinki process in Europe, but ultimately the approach will have to be one that is specifically tailored to the North Korean situation.

As Congress passes this legislation, we must not lose sight of the
fact that members of the Bush administration are toiling to convince
North Korea to resume the disablement of its nuclear facilities and to
agree to a verification mechanism for its nuclear declaration. These
efforts are of vital importance. It is regrettable that progress has
been derailed over a dispute about sanctions relief and the
verification protocol. North Korea should understand that if Pyongyang
honors its commitments, we stand ready to honor ours. On the basis of
action-for-action, I hope the United States and North Korea, along
with other members of the Six Party Talks, will work to accomplish the
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and the full integration of
North Korea into the community of nations. In exchange for the
complete and verifiable elimination of its nuclear weapons programs,
North Korea stands to receive energy assistance, sanctions relief, and
security assurances from the United States and other members of the
Six Party Talks. I look forward to the day when North Korea is truly
at peace with its neighbors and enjoys normal relations with the
United States. It is a future that is within North Korea's grasp if it
abandons its pursuit of nuclear weapons.

No. But there's not much I can do about it. Not much anybody can do
about it. He's commander in chief. If he surges another 20, 30, or
whatever number he's going to, into Baghdad, it'll be a tragic
mistake, in my view, but, as a practical matter, there's no way to
say, Mr. President, stop.

I'm going to try it after the hearings. Here there's three things I'm
going to try to do, Tim. Speak out as loudly as I can as to why I
think repeating this mistake we've tried it twice before why it will
not work, and why we need a political solution first, not a military
solution. Secondly, I'm going to be holding extensive hearings as
chairman, incoming chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee for the
next four weeks, bringing in experts from every, every perspective to
talk about what options are remaining in Iraq. And thirdly, I have,
I've, I've drafted a resolution of disapproval that is just hortatory,
it's a to send to the Senate to try to convince the president that
there are significant numbers and members of the United States Senate
who think this proposal is a mistake, and hopefully force him to
reconsider it. Because every two months he's going to have to
reconsider this, every two months. It's not just surging once and
that's it. He's not surging for a year. Every two months he's going
to have to decide, Do I continue to extend the tours of duties of
those who are there? Do I bring more people in? And hopefully make
the case to him that this is a mistake.

This is a good guy, smart guy. We've been to Iraq together. I've
been there seven times, he's been there six.

No, no. No, but, but the truth of the matter is we, we agree on two basis premises: A failed state would be a disaster to the United States of America, and two, the current strategy isn't working. But nobody's calling, that I'm aware of, for pulling all of our troops out. That's a red herring, number one. The question is do we continue with a policy that is failing? We've tried this policy twice in the last 12 months, surging troops into Baghdad. Unfortunately, my friends have got this backwards. We need a political solution before you can get a military solution. What has changed from three years ago when I sat on this program with you and said we need to surge 60,000 troops then is we now have a civil war. All the king's horses and all the king's men will not put Iraq together again absent Maliki making some very hard decisions about what he's going to do.

Think of this, we're going to surge 20-, 30-, whatever the president
says, thousand troops into Baghdad again, a city of six million
people, six million people where civil war is raging. We're going to
have our troops go door to door in 23 neighborhoods. We're going to
keep them out of Sadr City where, in fact, we are not we're told hands
off because Maliki is dependent upon Sadr, the Mahdi army. This is a
prescription for another tragedy. If we want to make sure we don't
lose Iraq, don't use the last bullet in our gun here, prove ourselves
to be impotent, and embolden every sector of the Iraqi population to
conclude we are incapable of affecting outcomes there. That's my
worry about doing the same thing again.

I'll talk about that.

I don't know if I can respond to The Washington Times. I'm not going
to now. I don't understand what the devil they just said. There's
been no one on your program in the last four years who've been more
supportive of the president attempting to try to get it right in Iraq,
number one. Number two, no party out of power ever has a
congressional voice that is a unified voice on a particular policy.
That's, that, that's a red herring. Number three, if you take a look
at what Lindsey just said about where the Democrats are, the Democrats
are consistently in the place where we said we'd follow what was
recommended by the vast majority of the experts. Think about this.
Nobody, nobody has recommended what the president's about to do. They
all say a need for a changed plan. The Baker Commission, opposed to
the position suggested. The generals oppose the position suggested.
Even those who think we should surge troops, like the American
Enterprise Institute, talk about it and they're honest about it. They
say if we surge troops, then, he said, we have to go from one we have
to bring Sadr City under control. He talks about my friend talks
about letting the Iraqi political establishment have some time to do
something. What's the Iraqi political establishment here? You have a
guy who is heading up that government who is tethered to a guy who is
one of the worst guys in the whole region, the new Hezbollah, the
Mahdi army, a guy named Sadr. You have the prime minister of the
country unwilling to take a political chance to deal with what my
friend talks about, the militia.

What you do is you tell him what exactly what everyone's recommended.
Look, Maliki, and look, government, we are, over the next year, going
to begin to draw down. You step up to the ball and make some hard
decisions about getting the Sunnis in the deal through oil. You make
some hard decisions about implementing the constitution, which says
we're a loosely federated republic. You let local areas have control
over their local police forces. You make the political compromise
necessary in any emerging democracy. But do not continue the process
where your only objective is to hold together the Sunni or the Shia
coalition, wipe out the Sunnis and expect you're going to have
anything remotely approaching democracy.

If that doesn't happen we have full-blown chaos, you need plan B.
Then you disengage and you contain. Then the question is, what do you
do? The reason why we should be talking to the neighbors, Tim, is not
just the degree to which they may be able to positively impact, which
is marginal. What happens if this is a bad bet? Nobody you'll find,
including my friend, will tell you there's any good option left.
There's options, but no good options.

You can't do it. It's what because it made sense in the Constitution
when you said you could cut off funding when you had no standing army.
We have a standing army with a budget of hundreds of billions of
dollars. You can't go in and, like a tinker toy, and play around and
say, You can't spend the money on this piece and this piece
and he able he'll be able to keep those troops there forever
constitutionally if he wants to.

Because it's very difficult to it's constitutionally questionable
whether or not you can do that. I think it is unconstitutional to
say, We're going to tell you you can go, but we're going to
micromanage the war. When we wrote the Constitution, the intention
was to give the commander in chief the authority how to use the
forces, when you authorize them, to be able to use the forces. And
so, look, what we have to be doing here is the president the only way
this is going to change, Tim, and I've been saying I'm a broken record
on this is when a majority of Lindsey's colleagues, Republicans, say
to the president, Mr. President, enough. We are not going to
support you any more, that's when the president will begin to change
his policy. That's when we begin to listen to bipartisan groups.
That's when we bebin begin to listen to the majority of the expert
opinion in this country.

Here's what I believe. I was referring to I was being asked about the vice president and the former secretary of defense, Rumsfeld, and I said they're two of the smartest people I've ever known in my years here in Washington, and they could not have believed what they'd been saying for the last three years that we're winning. They could not believe that. So what is the explanation? Why would they continue to say we're winning when, as bright as they are, they know that was pure malarkey? And the only conclusion I can and I said I've tentatively concluded among about those two people, that they concluded that the required change in, in, in, in approach to Iraq would be so radical that they don't think it could work. Therefore, keep it stitched together, pray for a Hail Mary pass and/or pass it off to the next guy. Because, look, do you believe rhetorical question, I acknowledge do you believe Rumsfeld and Cheney believed what they've been saying for the last three years? We'd come back, both of us, on this show, both of us together, and say, Look, this is what we saw on the ground here. How could they not know we were losing so badly? So that's why I was referring to those two men.

But I want to make a point about that Lindsey just made. My view is
we have one chance to not lose Iraq, and it rests in not repeating the
mistakes we've made. It made sense to surge 60,000, 70,000, 100,000
troops before there was a civil war. There is now a civil war. You
need a political solution before you can get a physical solution.
Unless Maliki is willing to deal the Sunnis in so they abandon the
insurgency, unless the Sunnis are willing to allow, under the
constitution, the Shia to control their local districts like the Kurds
do, there is no possibility, none, with 500,000 American forces there.

It, it was, it was Abu Ghraib again. It had the same kind of just
poisonous impact. And that's why, if I were Maliki's adviser, I'd
say, Now is the time you have to make a dramatic move to hold
accountable the Sunnis who engaged in that. You, as the leader of a
united country, have to stand up and publicly condemn it. I don't
think he has it in him.

Condemn the Shiites.

I do not. This is a red herring. Here's the deal: 20,000 30,000,
40,000 troops is not enough. Let's get real here. And I'd like to
ask my friend, tell name me the moderate Iraqis. Name me the moderate
Iraqis who are out there prepared to make the kind of compromises
democracy requires. We came back after the election when we were over
there in when, when, when, when they voted, the Iraqis. And the
president said, Great democratic move. And I sat in the White House,
and I said, Mr. President, it was a sectarian election. There was
no democratic movement there. You've got to compromise. We keep
looking for Thomas Jefferson hiding behind Iraq somewhere.

Well, I think, realistically, we have the remainder of this year. And
at the end of that time, I think this is, this is ball game. And my
friend is right. That's why smart guys are doing what Senator what
Secretary Baker and a lot of other people are saying. We've got to
think about the totality of the region. That's why you should be
talking to these other countries. That's why you should be putting a
plan B in place. That's why you should be forcing a political
solution. And remember, this administration said just as little as
several months ago, a month ago, We can't tell the Iraqis what to
do. Give me a break. Give me a break.

I agree. He has no power.

Who are the moderate leaders?

I am running for president.

I am. I'm filing exploratory committee before the month is out.

I'm going to be Joe Biden, and I'm going to try to be the best Biden I
can be. If I can, I got a shot. If I can't, I lose.

That language is actually the language that I that Carl Levin and I
drafted, which said that, Mr. President, you got to start moving
combat troops out of harm's way now. The whole function of this is to
try to get this president to change his strategy. He operates on the
premise that, if we put enough troops in the middle of a civil war, we
can give breeding room to a group of people in Baghdad to get together
and form a strong central government that's a democracy. That will
not happen in your lifetime or mine. I said that four years ago; I say
it now. The only rational purpose for troops in Iraq now: train
Iraqis, prevent al-Qaeda from occupying large chunks of territory.
and we should begin to decentralize the government. That's the
underlying essence of what the language in this bill is about. It
says, though, start now to redeploy and have as a target to get out by
April 1st the bulk of the combat troops. I strongly subscribe to that
view.

I think it is unconstitutional to say we're going to tell you, You
can go, but we're going to micromanage the war. When we wrote the
Constitution, the intention was to give the commander in chief the
authority how to use the forces when you authorize him to be able to
use the forces.

Not at all. Did you hear what I said? I said how to use the
forces. We have authority to tell him how to use the forces. If you
get in there, though, and once you tell him we have, we have a
responsibility to tell him what the mission is. He does not have the
authority to engage in a mission of the use of our force in a country
or out of a country that we do not authorize. And that's the thrust
of what we're trying to do here. We're trying to fundamentally change
what this president is using our forces for. He's in the midst of a
civil war with the objective of a flawed objective of establishing a
strong central government. That will not happen, and we have an
obligation to push back as much and as often and as thoroughly as we
can.

No, we're not setting a deadline. Read what it says. It says the
target date, left up to the generals to determine whether or not it is
appropriate to withdraw all forces.

No, no, but it leaves forces behind. We're trying to change the
mission, Tim. The mission is all of us have been arguing one
exception, in both parties, that you're going to have to leave forces
behind in Iraq while this new government if we actually get one up and
running is trying to function and trying to set up. The look, the
problem here is this is also a moving target. I also called for more
troops in Iraq. I called for more troops on this program a couple
years ago. That was in order to stop a civil war. Once the civil war
began I was on the program after that saying all the troops in the
world cannot settle a civil war. So what I'm having to respond to,
like everyone else, is the president's initiatives and his failures
that, that required difference circumstances and different answers at
different times. But the fundamental principle's the same: We have
an obligation to tell the president of the United States if we
disagree with the mission for which he's using American forces. And
the mission that he has us on is to settle a civil war through
establishing a central democratic government in Baghdad. That mission
is strategically flawed.

I no longer have a problem setting a target, a target that is
flexible. There is no there's nothing in it says that every troop has
to be out on April the 1st.

I said back then, before we went to war, I wrote a report saying the
decade after, and everyone was talking about the day after. And the
point I was making was, if you went in and used force, which he should
not have done when he did it, that we were committing and signing on
to a decade. That was the that was the minimum requirement. I also
pointed out we needed more troops. I also pointed out at that time we
would not be greeted with open arms. I also pointed out at that time
oil would not pay for this. It was a warning, a warning to the
president. Mr. President, the objective of us giving you this
authority is to get inspectors back in, bring the pressure of the
world community which remember, at the time, when we were sitting here
talking about this, the at that moment the issue was are we going to
pull out of are we going to lift sanctions on Iraq or are we going to
put more sanctions on Iraq? That, that was the context in which that
debate was taking place.

They are mistaken. They are making a mistake that is not practical.
I don't know how that can work.

For the reasons I just stated. I think it's may we may end look, Tim,
here's where we may end up. This president may so make it so
difficult to reach the objective, the only reasonable one I think's
available, which is to leave Iraq, leaving behind a country secure
within its own borders, not a threat to its neighbors, that is a
loosely federated republic. It may get so bad that we do not have that
option, and all of the option we have available to us is to withdraw
and try to contain the civil war inside Iraq. We are not there yet.
And until we reach that point, I am not prepared to say there are no
circumstances under which, after a date certain, we would not have a
single troop inside of Iraq.

No, that's not what I said. I just got finished telling you what I
said, which was if, in fact, this president changes the circumstances
again, where there lose all prospect of being able to achieve the goal
that I've just set out, which I think could be achieved if we
decentralize power in Iraq, if we have a limited federal government in
Iraq, where we train the army, where they have control of the borders
and their currency, where we give control over the fabric of the daily
lives of the various warring factions including their local police
forces their laws relating to marriage, divorce, the things they're
killing each other over, if we get to the point where that is no
longer an option and the place has totally disintegrated which it
may that's a different circumstance. You can't I don't know anyone
who can say I speak for myself. I cannot say for with absolute
certainty what I will do on every potential contingency because I have
no control over this president's foreign policy and the direction he's
taking us in Iraq.

As of today, I would not vote to cut off all funding if the funding
cutoff said there can be absolutely not a single solitary American
force left anywhere within Iraq within a time certain.

That's right, and I was correct about that. He must be, in fact and
remember the weapons we were talking about. I also said on your show,
that's part of what I said, but not all of what I meant. What I also
said on your show at the time was that I did not think he had
weaponized his material, but he did have. When, when the inspectors
left after Saddam kicked them out, there was a cataloguing at the
United Nations saying he had X tons of, X amount of, and they listed
the various materials he had. The big issue, remember, on this show
we talked about, was whether he had weaponized them. Remember you
asked me about those flights that were taking place in southern Iraq,
where were they spraying anthrax? And, you know, what would happen?
And, you know, so on and so forth. And I pointed out to you that they
had not developed that capacity at all. But he did have these
stockpiles everywhere.

Well, the point is, it turned out they didn't, but everyone in the world thought he had them. The weapons inspectors said he had them. He catalogued they catalogued them. This was not some, some Cheney, you know, pipe dream. This was, in fact, catalogued. They looked at them and catalogued. What he did with them, who knows? The real mystery is, if he, if he didn't have any of them left, why didn't he say so? Well, a lot of people say if he had said that, he would've, you know, emboldened Iran and so on and so forth.

But the point was, we were talking then about whether or not we could
keep the pressure of the international community on Iraq to stay in
the box we had them in. And remember, you had the French and others
say the reason all those children were dying in Iraq, the reason why
hospitals didn't have equipment is because of what we, the United
States, were doing, imposing on Iraq these sanctions. And that was
the battle. The battle was do we lift these sanctions or do we in
fact increase the sanctions? And everyone at the time was talking
about from the secretary of state to even the president that this was
to demonstrate to the world the president of the United States had the
full faith and credit of the United States Congress behind him to put
pressure on the rest of the world to say, Hey, look, you lift the
sanctions, you're we're going to be on our own here. Don't lift the
sanctions. Get the inspectors back in. That was the context of the
debate, to be fair about it.

Absolutely.

I, I wasn't wrong. I was on your show when you asked me about
aluminum tubes, and I said they're for artillery. I don't believe
they're for cascading.

He was a threat.

The threat he presented was that, if Saddam was left unfettered, which I said during that period, for the next five years with sanctions lifted and billions of dollars into his coffers, then I believed he had the ability to acquire a tactical nuclear weapon not by building it, by purchasing it. I also believed he was a threat in that he was every single solitary U.N. resolution which he agreed to abide by, which was the equivalent of a peace agreement at the United Nations, after he got out of after we kicked him out of Kuwait, he was violating. Now, the rules of the road either mean something or they don't. The international community says We're going to enforce the sanctions we placed or not. And what was the international community doing? The international community was weakening. They were pulling away. They were saying, Well, wait a minute. Maybe he's not so bad. Maybe we should lift the no-fly zone. Maybe we should lift the sanctions. That was the context.

And on your show, you had that one Sunday the vice president of the
United States saying he's reconstituted his nuclear weapons. I was on
a simultaneous program, they asked me the question. I said either the
president either the vice president's not telling the truth or he did
not get the same briefing I have or he fully misunderstands what he
was told. So I did not believe he had weaponized his materials. But
he did have material that, in fact, could theoretically be weaponized.
And to let it sit there at the time, I wanted the inspectors back in
to force him that position of having to give it up.

That's unfair. I said that on your program it was a mistake between,
and you make it sound like I went to Iowa and all of a sudden I had
people out there saying Biden is

Yeah, because I learned more, like everybody else learned, about what, in fact, we were told. Even the stuff we were told, the parts that I believed about what was going on with Saddam. We were told at the time, remember, that all these Iraqi generals were ready to, you know, to step up and take on Saddam, that we had it was implied that we had this ability to go to do a lot of things we didn't do. We had commitments at the time from the president that he would not move without the international community with us. There were a whole lot of things that changed, a whole lot of things that changed.

The thing that I regret, and I'll say it again, and I said it way before '07 and going to Iowa, is that I regret having had the believed that this administration had any competence. It is the most incompetent administration I've ever if I'd known they were going to misuse the authority we gave them the way they did, if I'd known that they were going to, once they used it, be so incompetent in the using of it, I would have never ever, ever given them the authority. If I were president, would I have asked for the authority? I would have asked for the authority in order to demonstrate to the world that they better not be lifting sanctions, they better not be putting pressure on having no-fly zones, and they better join with us in putting the screws onto Saddam by screwing down the sanctions on Saddam as opposed to lifting the sanctions. That's what the debate was about at the time.

And the other thing people forget, Tim, is everybody said, Well, how
could you not know that? Almost every major editorial board in the
country reached the same conclusion that we reached about the value of
keeping the sanctions on Saddam and the need to show the world this
pressure was available. And why did they think it? They thought it
because he had acted relatively reasonable with regard to Afghanistan.
The president had acted rationally with regard to Afghanistan, and on
your show I remember being on your show at the end of that year and
the question was, Has the president become an internationalist?
Remember that? Remember that whole those, those discussions? So the
idea that everybody should have known that they were going to be as
irresponsible in the use of the authority, that they were going to
overrule what, what Powell was getting done at the United Nations,
that they had inspectors back in and then they were going to dis the
inspectors like the vice president and president did, maybe I should
have anticipated that. But most people didn't anticipate it, and
I'm and that's my mistake.

Oh, I did. I did. And when I was chairman of the committee I, I
can't tell you the details but I called every intelligence agency
before the Foreign Relations Committee, had them all sit there at
once. And it was on the aluminium tubes. And I pointed out to all my
colleagues who came that there was vast disagreement among the
intelligence community. I also said, you remember after this period,
that I believed that the one part of George Tenet that I've heard
about his book that I believe is right is that the it wasn't the
administration got all bad intelligence; they misused, deliberately
misused the intelligence they had. They only told you the down side.
They did not tell you the doubt that existed within the intelligence
community. I met with General Zinni, I met with all our major
commanders at the time, and they were split about whether or not what
he had. But by and large, I don't think any of them really believed
that somehow he had a nuclear weapon in the waiting. Nobody believed
that.

I despite the doubts I heard, I voted to give the president the
authority to avoid a war. Look, Tim, he also had there was no
question in the mind remember we were, we were on this show, Dick
Lugar and I. We had the Biden/Lugar authorization through of the
president, which was much more constrained much more constrained than
the authority he actually got. But and what, what happened? What
happened was, I didn't know Dick Gephardt and Joe Lieberman were
separately negotiating with the president until I got a call on a
Monday night from Dick Lugar saying, Look, we're going to lose our,
our, our amendment, which is much more constrictive on the president
because there's been a separate deal being cut. He had 55 votes no
matter what.

It allowed the president to go to war. It did not authorize him to go
to it. You make it sound like it said, Mr. President, go to war. It
said, Mr. President, don't go to war. It said go to the United
Nations. Mr. President, don't go to war, try to get a deal here.
Mr. President, get the inspectors back in. Mr. President, tell us
that that's what you're about to do. And, Mr. President, if all else
fails, you have authority to use force. That's what it said.

I believe we are less safe as a nation now because what has happened
is the conduct of this war has so badly damaged our readiness; the
conduct of this war, and the, and, and, and the blood and resources
we've had to expend, it has limited our credibility around the world
and limited our flexibility in terms of the use of force. Here we
are, we could end the carnage in Darfur tomorrow, but why aren't we
doing it? In part we're not doing it because we are so tied down. We
could fundamentally change the dynamic in Afghanistan. Why aren't we
doing it? Because we are tied down. So in a broad, broad sense so
when I come back on my 41st, if you invite me back, or my 48th trip
here, you don't say, Well Biden, you know, you, you really like
Saddam, you know, that's not what this is about. What it's about is
Saddam was a butcher, the world's happy, may he burn in hell. He
deserves it. But in terms of our globally global positioning, our
geopolitical strategy, as the think-tank guys down here talk about it,
we are worse off than we were when we had Saddam sitting there because
of the impact on our military and the impact on our credibility.

I believe the secretary of state and secretary of defense believe they
don't know what to do with it, and they plan on handing this war over
to the next president. I said that a year ago.

I this is, this is not a game show, where you know, a,a, a football
game. What this is about is we have lost 3300 dead, we have 24,000
wounded, and, and we still have an opportunity to deal with the
possibility of not trading a dictator for chaos, and but it will not
happen unless we have a serious change in our operating strategic
premise. And that is we have to decentralize, not centralize this
government. We've got to get the world community in on owning part of
this, by calling an international conference to put pressure on the
regional powers. If we don't do those two things, I don't see a happy
ending to this whole undertaking. We may be forced into a position
where there's no option, at some point, to withdraw and try to contain
the chaos. The fact of the matter is that there is I am worried
about my son gets angry with this. My son's unit may get sent to
Iraq, and if it does, he goes. I don't want that to happen. But if
it happens, it happens. But I don't want my grandson going. And how
we leave Iraq is going to determine not merely whether my son goes or
not, but whether my grandson goes. So the idea of winning and losing
this is the wrong language, in my view. It's about salvaging our
interest, or not salvaging our interest. And we're very close to not
being able to salvage any of these policies.

And it's an important message I'm not delivering.

I he can say what he says, I'll I stick by what I said.

Well, I think you have an obligation to figure out how to salvage your
interests. Look, sometimes the game is lost, but what do you do? You
may decide you're going to make sure that your halfback ends up
winning the scoring championship by letting him run 12 more times.
Look, this is not absolute. There's nothing absolute. If you
believe what is lost, is lost the opportunity to establish a democracy
there? Well, that was lost on the day we got there. But if it is
about whether or not you can establish a stable regime, an environment
so this war doesn't metastasize, you do not have Turkey in after the
Kurds, you don't have the Iranians in full-bore, you don't find this
thing blowing up around the region, that is not lost yet. But it
could be lost. What is the prize? What are we attempting to do here?
What I'm attempting to do is protect American interests, so that we do
not end up a year, three, five and 10 from now where there is total
chaos in the Middle East well beyond the borders of Iraq.

Basically, Baker's in a minority. Henry Kissinger's signed onto that
plan. Madeleine Albright has signed onto the plan. If you look at
the Baker report, it goes on to say We may get where Biden is talking
about. Guess what? We're getting there. What is this administration
implicitly acknowledging by building a wall? Give me a break.
They're building a wall, and they're talking about a centralized
government? Now, look, Tim, you know what happened in the Balkans.
Once there was an agreement reached as to this political agreement
reached as to the separation of the parties, from Brcko to Sarajevo to
Srebrenica, there was an incredible diminution in the internecine
warfare. Why? Because we're in the context of an overall political
settlement. What this is all about is maneuvering each of these
groups to determine who is going to call the shots. Once you've laid
that out and you put yourself in a position where look, there's never
been a time in history that I can think of, Tim, where there's been a
self-sustaining cycle of sectarian violence that has ended even
remotely reasonably without a federated system. Never. What makes
Jim Baker and everyone else think that this is going to be the first
time in history that it's different? And mark my words, everybody's
coming in the direction that I'm talking about. There's an
inevitability to it.

While Rudy and his friends were cheering on Star Wars, I made a speech the day before 9/11 to the National Press Club saying that because of the preoccupation of this administration of not focusing on terror, we are going to have a major terrorist attack and it's likely to come in the belly of a plane or in the hull of a ship. Rudy Giuliani continues to abide by and adhere to this utterly failed policy. The message Rudy should be sending is to the president, Mr. President, you have not imported any, not a single solitary major recommendation, Mr. President, of the 9/11 Commission. Mr. President the majority of American cities still don't have any interoperable capability. Mr. President, all those cargo containers that come ashore in my city, they're not being inspected, Mr. President.

I say to Rudy, Rudy, you're directing your, your ire at the wrong guy,
the guy you continue to cling to. This administration has been almost
criminally negligent on what it has done to deal with protecting the
homeland. They've cut thousands of cops across the nation. They're
the ones who're going to find terrorists walking into an apartment
complex that's been empty. They have not done virtually anything the
9/11 Commission has recommended. Rudy is being Rudy, and Rudy is dead
wrong, and I really look forward to debating Rudy on this subject.

I'll tell you where you get it. First of all, we're going to end this
war. It's 100--$100 billion a year we're spending. Number one, it's
100 billion. Eliminate the tax cuts for people making over a million
bucks, and they'll go for it. They, they didn't ask for it; they know
they don't need it. That's 85 billion bucks a year.

No, I got it. I got it. Let's go through them, because I think you're asking, obviously, a fair question.

Eliminate the, the, the tax break for investment on dividends
and which is $195 billion is, is, is the cost of that. And begin to
do, for example, on the crime side, it's pointed out in my crime bill
for every single dollar we spent we saved the public $6, $6 dollars.
We have to have there's a fancy word down here a little new paradigm
down here in Washington, as my Republican friends like to say.
Investment in these areas saves money. For example, for $26 billion a
year, I can insure every single solitary child under the age of 18 in
the United States. America doesn't have health insurance. For $3
billion a year, I can double the investment we have on alternative
energy sources and research. For a billion dollars a year I can put
50,000 more cops back on the street. And so this is where we're,
we're talking manageable numbers. But the larger point here, in my
view, the larger point here, and I think distinguishes me from
Democrats, I think we got to start looking at the direct savings that
come from the investments we make. If we make an investment in
wellness, we save hundreds of billions of dollars here. And so we got
to look at it differently, Tim. But you need start-up dollars. The
place I'd start off with is somewhere over $220 billion a year by the
tax cuts and ending the war. And, by the way, all you need is $10
billion a year for the next five years to fund every single solitary
aspect of the 9/11 Commission report, and I would only use 10 of the
85 billion from the top 1 percent for that purpose.

Absolutely.

The answer is absolutely. You have to. You know, it's one of the
things that my, you know, the political advisers say to me is, Whoa,
don't touch that third look, the American people aren't stupid. It's
a real simple proposition. We have to do you and I were talking about
Bob Dole earlier. I was one of five people I was the junior guy in
the meeting with Bob Dole and George Mitchell when we put Social
Security on the right path for 60 years. I'll never forget what Bob
Dole said. After we reached an agreement about gradually raising the
retirement age, etc., he said, Look, here's the deal, we all put our
foot in the boat one at a time. And he kicked he stepped like he was
stepping into a boat. And we all make the following deal. If any
one of the challengers running against the incumbent Democrat or
Republicans attack us on this point, we'll all stay together. That's
the kind of leadership that is needed. Social Security's not the hard
one to solve. Medicare, that is the gorilla in the room, and you've
got to put all of it on the table.

Everything. You've got to.

I did and I do.

That's right.

I'll tell you why I criticized the Supreme Court. They upheld the
ban, and then they engaged in what we lawyers call dicta that is
frightening. You had an intellectually dishonest rationale for an
honest justification for upholding the ban, and that was this: They
went further, and then they, in the language associated with the
decision said, by the way, they blurred whether there is the first
trimester and third trimester in how much I know this is going to
sound arcane to the listeners but whether or not they blurred the
distinction between the government's role in being involved in the
first day and the ninth month. They blurred the role in terms of
whether or not there is they became paternalistic, talking about the
court could consider the impact on the mother and keeping her from
making a mistake. This is all code for saying, Here we come to undo
Roe v. Wade. And it went on to say, by the way, that the life of the
mother was, in fact, permissible exception, and it went on to say that
even that any woman could challenge, even if her health is at risk,
could come back to the court to challenge that. So the bottom line
here is, what they did is not so much the decision, the actual outcome
of the decision, it's what attended the decision that portends for a
real hard move on the court to undo the right of privacy. That's what
I'm criticizing about the court's decision.

Well, I was 29 years old when I came to the United States Senate, and I have learned a lot. Look, Tim, I'm a practicing Catholic, and it is the biggest dilemma for me in terms of comporting my, my religious and cultural views with my political responsibility. And the decision that I have come to is Roe v. Wade is as close to we're going to be able to get as a society that incorporates the general lines of debate within Christendom, Judaism and other faiths, where it basically says there is a sliding scale relating to viability of a fetus. We can argue about whether or not it's precisely set, whether it's right or wrong in terms of its three months as opposed to two months, but it does encompass, I've come to conclude, the only means by which, in this heterogeneous society of ours, we can read some general accommodation on what is a religiously charged and a publicly-charged debate. That's the, that's the decision I've come to.

Even within our own church, there's been debates about life, you know,
from, from Summa Theologica, Aquinas, and 40 days to quickening and
right to, you know, you know, Pious IX, animated fetus doctrine and so
on. So this the, the, the decision's the closest thing politically to
what has been the philosophic divisions existent among the major
confessional faiths in our country. And that's why, I think, that's
why I've come to the conclusion some long time ago, over 25 years ago,
that is the it is the template which makes the most sense.

I still am opposed to public funding for abortion, and the reason I am
is, again, it goes to the question of whether or not you're going to
impose a view to support something that is not a guaranteed right but
an affirmative action to promote.

I am prepared to accept my church's view. I think it's a tough one.
I have to accept that on faith. That is a tough, tough decision to
me. But there is a point relatively soon where viability it's clear to
me when there's viability, meaning the ability to survive outside the
womb, that I don't have any doubt. That's why the late-term abortion,
and that's why I continue, like your old boss Pat Moynihan, shared the
same view, he was very pro-choice is to use the jargon. But he, like
me, believed that you have this notion of abortion in the last month,
where there's clearly viability. And if you make that judgment based
upon the nature of the child's health, that is not a good basis for a
societal decision. Only the mother's health should be dictate the
outcome then. Otherwise, you, you yield to the side of the of, of, of
the fetus, which is almost full term.

Well, I think it probably is because social mores change. But look,
Tim, I don't think the government can dictate the definition of
marriage to religious institutions. But government does have an
obligation to guarantee that everybody has, every individual is free
of discrimination. And there's a distinction. You and I talk I
shouldn't say this I think we did talked about Meacham's book, the
American Gospel. And I, anticipating you asking me this, I wrote a
quote from his, from his book that I think sums it up. He says, The
American gospel is that religion shapes the life of the nation without
strangling it. That's where I think that's how we have to view these
very difficult decisions. I think government should not be able to
dictate to religions the definition of marriage, but I think, on a
civil side, government has the obligation to strip away every vestige
of discrimination as to what individuals are able to do in terms of
their personal conduct.

Yes. Yes, it is.

No. I don't have a look, I have met with more world leaders and as
many world leaders as anybody who sits in government today. They've
never had a problem understanding me. Milosevic had no problem
understanding me when I said, I think you're a war criminal. I'm
going to do everything in power to see you're tried as one. The prime
minister of, of Great Britain's never misunderstood me. All the way
back to Deng Xiaoping, he never understood misunderstood me. Look,
this is a rough game, man. This is a very rough game. My referring
to Barack as articulate, it was a mistake. But guess what, if you
look at I will not mention the national press person who just in
saying that the problem with Barack's appearance last on the debate
was he wasn't articulate enough. I mean look, give me give me a
break. The average American out there understands look, let me put it
another way. The good thing about being around a long time is people
have a basis upon which to judge you. And I didn't find any serious
person in the civil rights community, because of my long history and
long support for civil rights, thinking that I was trying to insult
Barack Obama in any way. I didn't find anyone suggesting that
anything else I have said goes to the heart of whether or not my
record is, is being undercut by what I've stated. But it is true. It
is true that my candor sometimes get me in trouble.

No, it was.

I did. It was 20 years ago, and I learned from it. The good for me
is, and the bad news, people have had 20 years to judge since then
whether or not I am the man they see or I am what I was characterized
as being 20 years ago. I learned a lot from it, and, let me tell you,
it was a bitter way to learn it, but I learned a lot.

To paraphrase a line from the Bible, you reap what you sow. And
ladies and gentlemen, we are reaping what we have sown, the seeds of
destruction and the seeds of malcontention that we've sown. I would
argue, since 1994 with the Gingrich revolution, ladies and gentlemen,
just take a look at Iraq, Venezuela, Katrina, what's gone down in
Virginia Tech, Darfur, Imus. Take a look. This didn't happen
accidentally, all of these things. Since 1994, from the Gingrich
revolution to Karl Rove and President Bush, we have wallowed, wallowed
in the politics of polarization.

Well, by the way, they're, they're, they're not directly responsible
for any of those things, but the atmosphere look, think of it this
way, how many shock jocks did we have in 1970s and the 1980s? What
happened when we concluded that when Newt Gingrich said the way to win
the House is to burn the House down? When all of the sudden we went
from I served, for example, I got here and a lot of old
segregationists were still here. Yet, we did not engage in arguments
about motive, we engaged in arguments about policy. And all of a
sudden, in the, in the mid '90s, it became If you're not with us,
you're not a good Christian. If you're not with us, you're not moral.
If you share a view, you are unpatriotic. The whole nature of the
debate changed. You had senators talking about the president of the
United States on the floor calling him Bubba. And we wonder why that
doesn't percolate through the entire society.

Oh, well, what Virginia Tech is about is the debate that come out came out afterwards, where you had this whole debate about, you know, if everybody had a gun, this wouldn't have happened and so on. I mean, it wasn't it didn't produce that kid, that kid was mentally deranged. And it didn't produce that.

But think of the all the other things, Tim. I mean, you cannot
engage a leader cannot engage the leaders of the country cannot engage
in this kind of, of, of talk and the way we characterize people and
the hatefulness of it and think it doesn't permeate society. As I
said earlier, you know, the famous line of Pat Moynihan, we've defined
decency down. I mean, look, what we've defined down is, is civility
in this country. I mean, things that you could say today in the
public square, you would have been pilloried for saying in 1975. It
matters.

Yeah. That's true. I did. And look, and that, and that was '87.
And, and, and the question was related directly to a guy asking me
about where I stood in my class. And I was like I was an immature
42-year-old guy who was acting like Your mother wears combat boots
in response. I thought he was challenging my and I just went out at
it, and I didn't know where the heck I ended up in my class. I honest
to God had no I wonder how many Americans would say, Tell me exactly
where you ended up in your class, and they could give you a number.
And I just went out, and I was angry. But that had I mean, I have, a
lot's happened in my life since then. And hopefully I'm a much I've
controlled that, that, that anger. I mean, the joke was I had two
craniotomies, and, you know, because I had two major aneurysms, and
they had to take the top of my head off a couple times. And as one
wag in Delaware said, writing about it, the reason they had to go in a
second time is they couldn't find a brain the first time. Well, I
hope when they were in the second time, they cut the temper cord

Yeah, it is gone, because all you've got to do is lie in a hospital
bed for five months, them telling you you're not going to make it
and to give you a new appreciation for the lack of urgency in anything
other than life-and-death issues.

Yes. I think what I said was that I needed to be able to get through
the campaign. That's what I had to do, not to start the campaign. I
believe to get through the first and I have to admit to you, I admit I
thought a lot more about how to be president than how to get elected
president, but I think I can raise sufficient money to make me viable
in the first four contests, and I think that's going to be where the
decision is made about who the next nominee's going to be.

No. I will not be vice president under any circumstances.

Secretary of state's a different thing, but I don't I won't do that
either. Look, the bottom line is, I really resent it when they go
after her or other Democrats the way they do. I think it's I think
part of this is being fair. And the idea that Hillary Clinton is
somehow not capable of dealing with or any one of those candidates, or
at least four of the candidates not being able to deal with Rudy
Giuliani I find or others I, I find not very accurate.

First of all, this is why we need public financing for presidential
elections. But to get to the heart of the question about Iran, no, the
amendment does not authorize the president to go to war with Iran, but
I voted against it for one simple reason: This administration can't be
trusted not to twist its words into a justification for war. That's
what they did with the 1998 Iraq Liberation Act, with the 2002
authorization to use force in Iraq, and what they do every day in
claiming that the executive branch has more power than the
Constitution gives it.

I did not vote for the war. I voted to protect American troops who
find themselves in the midst of a civil war without adequate
protection, and the Mine Resistant Vehicles that will reduce the
casualty rate by 80 percent. As long as this president has a single
American troop in Iraq, I will vote to protect that troop. With regard
to the need to have 67 votes to end the war, I mean that that is what
it takes to override a presidential veto.

This Spring we passed the Biden-Levin Amendment, which called for the
withdrawal of American combat troops, starting within 120 days of its
passage, and getting the bulk of all combat troops out of Iraq by
March of 2008. The president vetoed that bill; in order to impose this
mandate for troop withdrawal under the the Constitution we
needed 67 votes to override his veto and to begin to bring American
troops home. We did not have 67 votes there are only 51 Democrats,
therefore we needed 16 Republicans senators to join us to force the
president, under the Constitution, to bring the troops home.

I strongly support the Convention on the Rights of a Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

At one time or another, as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, I pushed for their ratification. As a matter of fact, it is my expectation that by the end of this month, we finally will have the votes to report out the Convention on the Law of the Sea.

With regard to the Kyoto Treaty, it is critical we re-engage the world and reclaim America's position as a leader in our climate change talks. As a matter of fact, I along with Sen. Lugar have been pushing the president to re-institute these negotiations. The very survival of the planet depends upon it.

And by the way, it's shameful that we have been unable to ratify, as
more than 60 other nations have, the U.N. Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. In the
meantime, as the author of the Violence Against Women Act, I have
introduced an International Violence Against Women Act to combat and
discourage any abuse against women in the world.

You are right after 2040, more will have to be paid out than is brought in through the Social Security System. That means we either must cut benefits or find an additional source of revenue.

Right now only the first $97,500 of income is subject to social
security tax the so-called CAP. I would raise the CAP to keep the
Social Security system solid.

The under-30 group is essential. I always have gotten, from the time I
was elected to the U.S. Senate at the age of 29, the vast majority of
that vote. I am absolutely confident that as my record and my
aspirations for this country become known, I will get the majority of
that vote. But, up until now, the only senators who are known have
been those who have been able to raise 10s of millions of dollars, and
I doubt very much whether the young voters of America think that is
the way we should choose a president. I will provide future
presidential candidates with public financing so that all will be
known equally well, and the only thing that really will matter is
their ideas not their bank accounts.

Yes you still vote for me. Because I am sure you agree, no one in America should be denied quality health care because they are poor or unable to afford health insurance.

I believe every American should be able to join the same health care program that federal employees have based on a sliding scale as to what they can afford.

We don't have to reinvent the wheel to give every American decent and
adequate health care.

It is true, we could refuse to bring up a budget, not even have a vote. But that also would mean there would be 166,000 troops in Iraq requiring at least one year to withdraw them all being left without adequate protection, including those Mine Resistant Vehicles, which I led the fight to fund and which only now are getting to the troops in Iraq.

I want to get the troops out of Iraq just as much as you do, but I don't want to leave them high-and-dry as they leave.

73 percent of the more than 3,800 deaths and 73 percent of the 28,000
wounded have been a consequence of roadside bombs. The Mine Resistant
Vehicles that are being sent to our troops will decrease by 80 percent
these deaths and injuries. How can we in good conscience not provide
them with these vehicles? Do we think the Iraqis are going to be
waving American flags at our troops as they leave, not attempting to
kill them?

In my view this administration has abused the Constitution more than any administration in modern history, and I predict that in the next several years, we are going to learn just how much they have trampled on our Constitutional rights and distorted our treaty obligations.

This administration redefined torture as existing only if organ failure or death results from the treatment of the prisoner. I pledge to you and every American that I will not attempt to maintain this bogus constitutional argument of a unitary executive.

That is why I voted against Gonzales's confirmation in the first place. That's why I was the first to call for his resignation, as well as for that of Rumsfeld. And that is why I called for accountability of officers and generals for Abu Ghraib, and for the immediate closure of Guantanamo Bay.

You can rest assured I will reverse the erosion of our Constitutional
rights and adherence to the international treaties we sign.

There is absolutely no evidence to that effect.

As a matter of fact, I asked the Internal Revenue Service to provide me with a single example of a farm that has had to be sold because of inheritance taxes would not under existing law and they could not provide me one.

I would appreciate if you could provide me with any specific
examples. Thank you.

Ending the war in Iraq and not extending the hundreds of billions of
dollars in tax cuts that only benefit the very wealthy, and are not
needed in order for our economy to continue to grow.

Well, I think a lot more is possible, Chris. Look, I think that the main thing is getting the American forces redeployed out of the fault lines of the middle of this civil war and to move along the lines of General Jones' objective, which moves them back to the border, have their mission focus on training Iraqis and protecting and force structure protection.

We don't need anywhere near that many troops for that purpose.

If we pulled every troop out of Iraq now, I think that would happen,
but there's a terrible consequence of staying the course.

No, not at all. Absolutely not. There is no evidence to sustain the assertion that if we were on the border protecting that inflow of material and men coming from Iran and other places, if we were training Iraqi troops and dealing with taking out Al Qaeda in large swaths of area they try to occupy, there is no suggestion no suggestion that would be anything remotely approaching abandonment.

It would be a fundamental change in tactic. And what is the tactic we're engaged in now? What is the consequence of it? The consequence of it is unremitting American casualties, loss of support for the war, an overwhelming desire on the part of the American people to get out completely, which would cause that consequence you've spoken about.

So there's not only consequences of pulling out completely, there's consequences of staying in the manner and mode we're in now.

And, Chris, the fundamental strategic strategy Gates and everyone else clings to is that there's a possibility to establish a strong central government in Iraq.

That will not happen in your lifetime. It will not happen, and today's
op-ed piece by Henry Kissinger reinforces that. There is no
possibility. They have no political strategy.

Sure, you're setting up a straw man.

No, I don't. I think the rest of the world would say they're finally getting smart. I think the European allies would say they're finally getting it right. I think, in fact, the regional parties would begin to think, Whoa, these guys are starting to figure this out.

Look, Chris, why are we in the middle of Baghdad? Why are we on all these fault lines? What are we doing? The president's express purpose, he said, was to surge into the midst of this civil war. For what reason? To get a political reconciliation in the central government.

I think everyone would say they finally started to come to their senses. They finally started to figure out the only way this is going to work is with three regions in this country that are loosely federated, and they'd begin to focus on establishing that.

And they'd have a diplomatic surge they brought in the rest of the world to say, Hey, pal, let's get this straight here in Iraq. You guys stay out. Here's the way this is going to work. There's going to be a regional government. I think they'd think we came to our senses.

Not partition.

Not partition. You keep saying that. It's not partition. Kissinger's not talking about partition. I'm not talking about partition. Gelb's not talking about it.

It's regions within a whole government, with a defined border, with a
central government distributing resources and protecting the
borders. That's what it is.

Not partition.

Well, first of all, that poll is misleading. You don't want to start comparing polls with me because you got 78 percent of the Iraqi people saying it's all right to kill Americans.

So polls you don't want to get into that with me, Chris, because you
have no argument at all.

Right.

Well, the Kurds sure want it. That takes care of about

And the other ones who want it now are the Shia began to want it.

The reason the Shia want it they want to have a well, look, Chris, polls taken in the middle of a war I don't know what they mean.

But I do know one thing. I was there last Thursday and I met with the Shia vice president who supports a regional form of government. I met with the Sunni vice president, Hashemi, who said his heart tells him a central government, his head tells him a regional government.

I met with the deputy vice premier of the the vice prime minister deputy prime minister who happens to be a Kurd who thinks that's inevitable, the way we're going.

This is about the same thing we did, essentially, in Bosnia. What did we do? We got the world powers in. We got the Russians, the French, the Germans, everybody in one room.

We brought in the warring factions. We sat them in a room and said figure this out, but there's not likely to be a strong central government in Sarajevo that can hold this country together.

Same thing pertains here. This is what you call diplomacy. This is what a president's supposed to do. A president is supposed to bring about a diplomatic solution.

This president is AWOL. He continues to cling to a failed strategy that he somehow thinks relying on a Maliki government or anyone else is going to establish a strong, central, unified government that's going to end this civil war.

And that is an abject failure. It's proven to be a failure. We should
get off of it.

First of all, the president doesn't know a lot about the Constitution, based on his conduct. He has a very unitary view of the Constitution, number one.

Number two, we do have a right to make such a judgment.

Number three, let's talk about consequences. What are the consequences of continuing to do what we're doing with essentially the way in which we're deploying these troops?

As the military has said, we're breaking we're breaking the United States military, flat breaking it. And what we're doing is we're going to end up in a situation where you don't have people signing up. You're going to end up having to go to a draft.

This long-term consequence of keeping these kind of deployments is absolutely disastrous for the United States of America and for the United States military.

It's not a good thing the other way either. You choose two very bad alternatives one very bad and one OK. And if you don't figure out how to get these folks some time home, you are going to break break this military. That's what this is about.

And we can do what we need to do in Iraq with significantly fewer
troops. That is my contention and the contention of a whole lot of
other people outside this administration.

MoveOn.org is as frustrated and angry and can't with this policy. What you saw is a burst of frustration. It was more about MoveOn.org than about the war.

And look. The idea that they have said they use one phrase, that somehow these guys are a bunch of un-Americans who should be run out of the country or something this is great political tactic for people to use. They were wrong in saying what they said, in my view.

But speaking of moving on, we should move on and decide what we're going to do about whether or not this continued failed policy that's chewing up American lives, chewing up American dollars, with no end in sight, is worth some disdain on the part of a lot of Americans who are really angry.

That's what you saw. You saw frustration there. And so, you know, this
is what it is. I think it was a mistake. But I don't think it's a
capital offense.

Look, I'm confident all the rest of those colleagues, all those others that are running as well, feel the same, and I think probably the majority of MoveOn.org probably regrets the way it came out.

But I think what you saw here is something that is it's over. It's done. They went, in that one instance, I think, overboard. But the point they were trying to make was still valid.

The point they were trying to make is that the American public hasn't been told the truth about this war from the beginning, and they don't think they're being told the truth about it now.

And this president you know, the earth moved when the president spoke the other day. He made clear what I said, I think, on your program 10 month ago: There is no plan to end this war by the time he's president. This is all about handing it off to the next president.

As one of your colleagues in the media said, he's using the American troops as a cork in a bottle which is to keep the very bad things from happening, spilling out into the region.

But there's no plan. There's no plan here to end the war. What's the plan? We're going to stand up the Iraqi forces? Here we are, 4.5 years later, $20 billion later. They still can't stand up.

And if you read the whole report that was put out by General Jones, it's going to be another four years before they're fully capable.

The American public are not prepared to keep American forces there
just to keep bad things from happening.

They want to know what you're going to do to be good.

The truth is I don't know anything about him. I mean, I know the name but I don't know anything about him. And as long as he can prove not prove; assert, and I believe, that he understands he's not just the president's lawyer but the country's lawyer, I could support him.

But I don't know enough about him, so he has to pass that test for me, go through that filter. Is he going to be the president's guy? Is he going to or is he going to stand up and defend the Constitution and be the people's lawyer as well?

And I just don't know the answer to that.

I found that fascinating. (Laughs.) Well, I think that's a bit of a reach. You know, I find that, you know, here's a guy that's gone along with George Bush on 90 percent of everything he's done, who's been dead wrong about the war, not only I mean, look, John did at the same time I was on your show saying we were not going to be greeted as liberators, there wasn't going to be enough oil to pay for this, there was going to be an initial civil war, the Sunnis and Shi'as were going to fight each other, John was on your show and others saying, No, no, no, no, no. That's not the case.

At the same time guys like Barack and I were saying, Hey, look, Afghanistan's a big problem; that's where the real terrorists are, John was saying, Afghanistan? The reason you haven't heard about it it's a success.

This was about judgment. Barack Obama passed the commander-in- chief test tonight. I think this is over in terms of that issue. I think John had his it was on his strongest turf, and he argued about the past. He had no suggestions about the future, when you think about it.

Look what he's talking about Iraq. He continues to talk about the
surge. And he even got that wrong. He talked about the surge being a
strategic idea. The surge was a tactical necessity to accomplish a
strategic goal. Remember what he used to be? I'll bet you can do the
mantra with me. We have to surge in order to create breathing space
for a political settlement.

That was the strategic objective, which has not been accomplished
yet. And then John says he wants to take the same strategy and apply
it to Afghanistan. Come on. And John's talking about he won't sit
down. John won't even sit down, he said, with a NATO ally who has
troops in Afghanistan fighting with United States troops against the
Taliban and al Qaeda? I mean, there's a man out of touch.

Sure.

No, no. Look, the American people are so much smarter. The American people know that Barack has a plan to end this war that even George Bush has essentially embraced, to draw down our troops over 16 months, hand the responsibility over to the Iraqis, stop spending our 10 billion bucks a month, start spending their $87 billion.

Barack Obama made it clear what he would do in Afghanistan. He called for 14 months ago that we needed to beef up our ability in Afghanistan. Look, we spend more money in three weeks in Iraq than we spent in six years in Afghanistan, and we wonder why things are being lost; more money on combat than we have on building up Afghanistan.

So, look, I just think, Keith, that they get it. The one thing they may not have gotten is that, you know, John McCain, being the hero he is and he is a hero John McCain saying he'd take care of veterans. I just want to point out, Disabled Veterans of America rate John at 20 percent on his voting record. The veterans' groups don't think John has cared for the veterans coming home.

And, you know, and so my point is that there's some places John is
because of his stature as a hero, is probably able to avoid being
viewed as out of touch. But I just think he just came across, at least
you'd expect me to say it, I know but I think he came across as
out of touch and angry.

Well, look, I think John his staff knows he needs a game changer, that this thing isn't going very well for him. So I think they probably thought I don't know what their strategy was, but to use your words, he looks like he's lurching back and forth.

Here's a guy last Monday who said the economy was doing great and was fundamentally sound; Bush had made great progress or had made progress over the last eight years. And then, two hours later, we have an economic crisis. As we Catholics say, where was the epiphany? What happened? Where was John a week ago, a month ago, six years ago, while he was on Wall Street talking about shredding how he was there wasn't a regulation that he saw that he liked.

I mean, this is a very difficult ground in fairness to John, it's really difficult to defend the terrain that he occupies. And the terrain he occupies is he's bought on to the economic philosophy of George W. Bush and the sort of, you know, free market, let it run its way; let it be on its own. And now, all of a sudden, he's talking about greed on Wall Street, the same way this foreign policy. He went in and thought this was a you know, this was going to be over in a short time, that we were going to be greeted, and so on and so forth.

John's judgment here's the point. John's judgment has been fundamentally wrong on the basic, critical foreign policy and domestic decisions we've had to make. And then John, at the same time, talking about he has to cut the budget, is still calling for an additional $300 billion a year in tax cuts for corporate America and the wealthy? Where does he think that money comes from? That goes straight to the deficit, or it goes straight to cutting programs or it goes to I mean, how does he I just don't get the math. I just don't get the math.

And I think people will get it. I hope I'm right about that,
anyway. If they don't, then I'm really missing them. I think the folks
are a lot smarter, a lot smarter, than everybody gives them credit
for.

No, no, no, no, no. I'm not going to do that condescending stuff John did tonight. You know, My friend knows if he had the experience, I mean, I've traveled around. I've traveled all those places John traveled to. I've been in Afghanistan twice. I've been in those mountains. I was the guy that, when the tanks were rolling into Tbilisi, I was there with the president, Mikhail Saakashvili, because he asked me to come and stand there with him. You know, I've been there. But that just because I was there doesn't make me right.

I think what we've got to do is we've got to talk about the future,
what we're going to do, how we're going to change it, how we're going
to make us a respected nation again worldwide. You know, and so I
think it's about me and the listener, not so much me and Sarah Palin.

Yeah, we'll see. (Laughs.) I don't know. I hope I do as well as Barack
did.
